# ID: fc326845c9234aa4a35a906bf45a4c7e
# Title: Irregular War in an Era of Great Power Competition: Why the US Army Cannot
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2017.0
# Fulltext:
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
The 2014 publication of the Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) marked the beginning of a concerted effort to fundamentally alter the trajectory of the U.S. military. The 2014 QDR directed a shift in focus from counterinsurgency and irregular warfare to more conventional threats that challenge the security of the U.S. on a broader scale. The review explicitly stated, "our forces will no longer be sized to conduct large-scale, prolonged stability operations." 
1
2
President Trump, similarly, has called upon the military to change course. In 2018, the Department of Defense published its National Defense Strategy, which unlike the 2014 QDR, specifically focuses on four adversary nations, in particular, China and Russia. The document acknowledges that the U.S. is in an era of great power competition and makes it clear that for the Trump administration "the central challenge to U.S. prosperity and security is the reemergence of long-term, strategic competition." 
3
Despite the switch in priorities in the 2018 NDS, the ability to operate against the guerrilla and insurgent in population centric environments is still essential to the success of the National Defense Strategy. U.S. adversaries will choose to counter the U.S. military through supporting insurgents, terrorists, and guerrillas, and even engage in asymmetric tactics themselves. This reality is parallel to the last era the U.S. was engaged in a great power competition during the Cold War, in which both the U.S. and Soviet Union prioritized limited and irregular war over major conventional conflict. The U.S. military cannot confuse the "undesirability of these mission with an actual ability to avoid them." 
4
This study agrees that conventional conflict between great powers deserves to be a U.S. priority because it is the most dangerous contingency. But irregular conflict in an era of great power competition also deserves priority because it will be the most likely form of conflict between the great powers and their partners. Last year, a National Defense University (NDU) report explained this important distinction. "A conventional war between the two nuclear powers is unlikely, so it is more likely that conflict will be in the form of irregular warfare in regions where there is instability and where one or both countries have a strategic interest." 
5
6
"Our primary focus, priority No. 1, is preparing for high-intensity conflict." 
7
While this study will focus on recommendations for the U.S. Army, it is important to first note how both the Marine Corps and Army leadership responded to the 2018 NDS. Specifically, both services published guidance that mirrored language in the NDS through the Army Vision 2028 and the Commandant's Planning Guidance (CPG). 
8
9
The Army Vision 2028 aligns the service with President Trump's national security priorities and calls for a major philosophic departure from the previous decade's focus on counterinsurgency (COIN). 10 Additionally, the then Secretary of the Army Mark Esper noted that the service's heavy emphasis on irregular and asymmetric warfare created an environment where adversary nations have been able to close the military technological gap with the U.S.
Furthermore, in response to this new world reality and to adhere to the NDS, Army leaders shifted budget priorities to reposition and supply the force for a high-end conflict with a great power. In terms of modernization and procurement, the 2018 Army budget prioritized the following in order of importance: long range precision fires, next generation combat vehicle, future vertical lift, network, assured positioning, navigation, and timing, air and missile defense, soldier lethality and synthetic training environment. 
11
12
The tradeoff for such steep investments in conventional military research and procurement is decreased investments in preparations for irregular warfare, and in fact Secretary
Esper acknowledged that there is a level of "risk management" when it comes to irregular warfare. 
13
14
15
17
Army is modernizing the service to better suited for a conflict with Russia or China. Simply mentioning irregular warfare is not sufficient to ensure the force will be properly prepared for such operations. It is imperative that the Army balance its focus on high intensity conflict with irregular warfare. The Army's evident aversion to these operations from Vietnam to the present has created undesirable situations where individual units, while deployed, are forced to improvise in the absence of doctrine, training, and intuitional guidance. The Popular Fallacies About Irregular War "An army that saw its raison d'etre as winning wars through the application of firepower and maneuver to annihilate enemy forces simply could not conceive of another kind of war in which its weapons, technology, and organization not only could not destroy the enemy, but usually could not even find or identify him." 
19
The Department of Defense defines all forms of warfare that do not fit the linear conventional construct of battle as Irregular Warfare. DoD specifically defines irregular warfare "as a violent struggle among state and nonstate actors for legitimacy and influence over the relevant populations. IW favors indirect and asymmetric approaches." 
20
22
Perhaps the reason for such terminology is a reflection of U.S. military culture and desire as opposed to clearly defined reality. The following question then must be asked: does the military's use of the term irregular war contribute to its lack of emphasis and thus poor performance in such conflicts? Dr. John Nagl explored the concept of organizational culture in Learning to Eat Soup with a Knife. He specifically compared the British counterinsurgency mission in Malaya to the American military counterinsurgency operation in Vietnam. Nagl concluded that the organizational culture of the British, due in large part to its colonial security requirements, fostered an environment that allowed it to learn and develop successful COIN strategy. The American military, however, developed a culture that emphasized allegiance to conventional war doctrine, and thus was slow to adapt in the face of an insurgent force. 
23
24
The educational foundation for U.S. Army officers since the mid-19 th century has its roots in the Napoleonic way of war. This largely comes from the writings of Napoleon's philosophic apostles, Carl Von Clausewitz and Antoine-Henri Jomini. Both individuals wrote following the Napoleonic campaigns, and essentially marveled at Napoleon's battlefield performances. Clausewitz's and Jomini's publications, however, were not historical accounts of battles, they were rather attempting to describe war in and of itself. In other words, they wrote about war as if its nature was a constant, in which enduring principles could be applied to force the desirable outcome. War, according to the Napoleonic idea, could be only won be through decisive battle that results in "an overwhelming tactical decision." 
27
28
29
There is some mention of irregular war in the works of both Clausewitz and Jomini, although the exact term is not used. Clausewitz classified this form of conflict as "People's War," and it is quite clear that he did not prefer this method of warfare noting that "like a slow, gradual fire, it destroys the foundation of the enemy's army." 
30
31
32
33
34
"The officer corps of the 1960s was trained to fight Russians. They envisioned massive tank and mechanized infantry battles. Forces versus force. In Vietnam every American officer dreamed of the day when the little beggars would come out and fight, but they never did."-Charles Krohan, Army Intelligence Officer in Vietnam 
35
General William Westmoreland, like the majority of his general officer peers, took part in conventional warfare in Western Europe during WWII or on the Korean peninsula in the 1950s.
During WWII, Westmoreland commanded an artillery battalion in North Africa and Italy.
During the Korean conflict, he commanded an infantry regiment on the peninsula against North Korean and Chinese conventional forces. Westmoreland's career, through and after these wars, was by Army standards, incredibly successful. So successful in fact that Westmoreland was the youngest to ever pin on the rank of brigadier general. He was the ideal Army officer and effectively being groomed for the highest of commands. It was this success that ultimately led to his appointment to commander of 
MACV in 1964. 36
Arguably, communist insurgents were active and gaining strength since the 1940s, yet, the military failed to prepare its leaders and forces to counter them. Nevertheless, because a conventional enemy was present with the North Vietnamese military, Westmoreland essentially devised his plan around defeating this type of adversary.
When speaking of the military's approach, Westmoreland stated, "it is always the basic objective of military operations to seek and destroy the enemy and his military resources." 
37
38
Westmoreland's experience in Vietnam is a lesson to the Army that an exclusive conventional approach coupled with a lack of education will result in almost certain catastrophe in this form of warfare.
Westmoreland's tenure is not an indictment of every army officer during that period, it is more a criticism of the institution for failing to educate its leaders. There were some intelligent and well-read officers who understood that the insurgency and thus the civilian populace were vital the military's success. For instance, Marine Major General Lee Walt developed the concept of the Combined Action Platoon (CAP) in 1965 during Westmoreland's command. 
39
Secondly, Westmoreland's successor, General Creighton Abrams implemented a country wide COIN strategy that was population centric as opposed to the former approach. The overall issue, however, was the unwillingness of Army leadership to acknowledge that the insurgency was the primary adversary and to thus force the institution to change how it trained and fought. The examples above demonstrated that the Army was tactically proficient, yet, led by generals with little to no preparation for irregular warfare.
From 2003 to 2006 Multinational Forces-Iraq (MNF-I), the command that oversaw U.S.
and collation military operations in Iraq, did not provide a coherent theater wide COIN strategy.
Much like the war in Vietnam, the general officers in Iraq had "a major gap in their educations"
and had little idea how to fight an insurgency. 
40
Ricardo Sanchez, a career infantry officer who was not adept at the intricacies of COIN, failed to provide a basic strategy to the various units scattered throughout the country. Great Power Competition Leads to Irregular Warfare "An inability to counter U.S. military superiority has led China, Russia, and major regional powers to employ unconventional warfare to achieve their national security objectives." 
47
The U.S. military will not have the luxury to avoid irregular warfare in the future. Great powers have supported and controlled insurgent groups to avoid a high-end conflict with the U.S.
while simultaneously undermining its security interests. The great power adversaries of the United States will seek to counter the U.S. and achieve their goals not solely through conventional means, but rather through mostly unconventional methods. Consequently, great power competition is not an era where the U.S. can expect irregular war to be the aberration and conventional conflicts become the norm. The reality is the opposite, the frequency of irregular warfare will increase as great powers such Russia, China, and Iran employ indirect strategies to avoid U.S. military strength.
Irregular warfare is an overlooked but common element in great power competition. The historical evidence shows that 70 percent of insurgencies since WWII received the backing of a great power. 
48
49
Furthermore, what separates the great power support from the other forms of support is the rationale. Specifically, the reasons great powers support insurgencies are geo-political and strategic in nature. Thus, great powers can be selective on which groups they support, as opposed to being compelled to support exclusively because of ethnic, religious, or ideological connections. This also allows great powers to perform actions below the threshold of direct armed conflict, while simultaneously weakening the adversary through draining their treasury and overextending their militaries. From the perspective of U.S. adversaries, who seek to avoid a conventional conflict, irregular warfare is a cost effective and lower risk form of warfare.
Great powers have used insurgent organizations to achieve strategic ends throughout the world to undermine and drain their adversaries. One important example of this is the Soviet Union and U.S. rivalry during the Cold War. It is significant to analyze this period because the U.S. and Russia have once again renewed the competition between them.
Arguably the last period of great power competition for the U.S. was the Cold War, as the Soviet Union and U.S. countered power and influence across the globe. During this period, the Soviet Union was a major outside contributor to both insurgents and terrorist organizations. The Soviet's support of insurgents and other groups was "deliberate and a matter of foreign policy." 
50
Outside of the Cold War, there are several other examples of state support to insurgencies; however, given the current day geo-political tensions between Russia and the West it is apt to study Soviet activity and apply it today. Moreover, reminiscent of the Cold War, the U.S. is making significant investments in preparation for conventional war; yet due to the threat of a nuclear war, the prospect of conventional warfare continues to be low in comparison to smaller irregular conflicts.
Both China and Russia largely stayed out of the war on terror, yet "were able to sit back, watch, and innovate in a more conscious manner" as the U.S. found itself in long protracted conflicts in central Asia and the Middle East. 51 Specifically, insurgent and terrorist organizations exploited a significant vulnerability of the U.S. military, its lack of preparation to fight nonuniformed guerrillas who possessed inferior firepower and technology. The most powerful conventional military in the world could not achieve its desired decisive victory. Although the U.S. military later adapted and found some success in the arena of irregular warfare, it still became a blueprint for the U.S. adversaries. Moreover, the U.S.'s great power adversaries understand that a direct conventional approach to the U.S. military would be unwise; therefore, "neither China nor Russia is pursuing a purely conventional or a solely nonconventional path; rather, each is following both simultaneously." 
52
In 2012, General Valery Gerasimov described a Russian strategy to undermine the West, in what is known as the Gerasimov Doctrine. 
53
The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness." 
54
There is little mystery as to how Russia will behave both diplomatically and militarily in the future given its recent conduct outside its borders. Russia's post-Cold War behavior clearly illustrates how it plans to expand its influence through creating chaos and upheaval in the west.
Its intervention in South Ossetia and the Crimea are key instances in which Russia employed a combination of irregular and conventional warfare tactics to confuse and overwhelm far weaker militaries. Additionally, in both cases, Russia backed separatists' movements that lobbied for independence and created political upheaval in their respective countries. The Russian government subsequently used the existence of these separatist groups to justify the use of conventional military operations. In this new era of great power competition, Russia has and will behave as it did in the Cold War.
In terms of the other great power country identified in the NDS, China, it has likewise displayed the propensity to avoid engaging the U.S. and its allies in conventional military tactics, and based of the behavior of Russia, it is expected that it will also strive to disrupt and degrade U.S. influence through asymmetric means. For instance, China's employment of non-uniformed militia posing as fishermen is a foreshadow to its future behavior if it encounters U.S. forces on the battlefield. 
56
The existence of nuclear weapons helped keep the U.S. and Soviet Union out of a direct war during the Cold War; yet deterrence also created an environment from which the U.S.
became vulnerable to irregular warfare. It appears as if history is repeating itself in the modern day as both China and Russia seek an alternative means to counter the U.S.
Perhaps no other country employs proxies to carry out its foreign policy more so than Iran. The regime has shown "that irregular warfare-including support to non-state partners-is a critical element to competing with the United States in the region." 
57
58
Because great power competition does not erase the prevalence and need to defend against irregular warfare, it is vital for the U.S. military to institutionalize its capacity for irregular warfare, just as it does for conventional warfare. This will require a deliberate balancing of the education, training, and focus of U.S. military leaders for both conventional and irregular warfare. There are some who argue that the U.S. military should simply focus on the existential threat, which is the conventional threat from a nuclear power, because "civilian leaders shouldn't expect their militaries to be "jack of all trades" organizations." 
59
In The American Way of War, military historian Russell Weigley contends that the U.S. military, due in large part to history and culture, has two distinct method of waging warfare, annihilation and attrition. He notes that a strategy of annihilation "seeks to overthrow the enemy's military power" through overwhelming firepower. 
60
61
62
Recommendations to the Army "The Army of today resembles the Army of the 1970s, which turned away from Vietnam and refocused on conventional warfare skills. The problem with this, of course, is that it is more likely to be dispatched to fight messy small wars than conventional state-on-state battles featuring tanks and fighter aircraft." 
63
The Army should be better postured for COIN operations through institutionalizing competency at irregular warfare across the force. The idea of institutionalizing means the Army investing time and resources in how its manned, trained, and equipped to gain and maintain competency at this form of conflict, as opposed to only doing so when the Army finds itself in such a war. Although irregular warfare is considered a core capability of the Special Operations Forces (SOF) community, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations recently noted "successful irregular warfare in competition short of armed conflict and against high-threat violent extremist organizations will continue to require support across the entire Joint Force." 
64
65
66
In 2017 the Army announced the creation of the SFAB, which was designed to reduce the burden of host nation security force advising on conventional forces. 
67
68
69
Furthermore, these Soldiers will also be able to provide vital input and assistance when assigned to non-advisor units. In other words, they will be the subject matter experts on advising when operating in a conventional unit.
Additionally, the SFAB's proficiency at this crucial COIN competency should continue to be a top priority of Army leaders; however, there are indicators that the mission set could change. A former SFAB commander stated, "the scope of what an SFAB does, will change as it aligns with the National Defense Strategy of near-peer competition." 
70
The Army should also consider the development of a Counterinsurgent ASI, that identifies Soldiers who have not only operated in COIN environments but led small and large units in them. 
71
Education "Our military has traditionally relied on education in times of uncertainty to develop an understanding of the future security environment, lead adaptation and ensure readiness to face future, unknown challenges." 
72
The Army published its updated Counterinsurgency Field Manual (FM 3-24) in 2006, right before Gen Petraeus introduced his new COIN strategy in Iraq. The publication of the manual was a significant moment for the Army and contributed to some successes during the surge period in Iraq. However, the COIN manual is not analogous to other army field manuals in that the complexities of insurgencies do not allow for timeless principles to be applied to each insurgency. In fact, HR McMaster, a contributor to the manual's production, noted "there can be no textbook on insurgency." 
73
74
While the publication of the 2006 COIN manual was a step forward for the U.S. Army's understanding of irregular warfare, it is not sufficient preparation for new generations of Army leadership.
Based off the Army's priority to prepare for high intensity conflict, it cannot be expected that every unit conduct realistic COIN exercises to the level of conventional war training. As mentioned previously, there are significantly different competencies involved with each form of warfare that necessitate different methods of preparation. Budget constraints are a significant factor as well given the Army's heavy investments in procurements in conventional war weaponry and other technological systems. Because of this fiscal and political reality, the Army must rely on a different method to ensure its officers and non-commissioned officers are competent when faced with an insurgency.
Education may be the most cost-effective and valuable methods to prepare Army leaders for the next irregular conflict. In fact, Secretary of Defense Mattis testified to Congress that "it's mostly training and it's mostly education that allows us to keep counterinsurgency inside the great power competition force that we are composing." 
75
76
77
79
Even in an era of great power competition, the Army needs to retain both its conventional and irregular warfare capabilities. Colin Gray agrees that,
The United States has a rich and extensive history of experience with irregular enemies. Moreover, that experience was by no means entirely negative. The trouble was and, until very recently, has remained, that such varied experience of irregular warfare was never embraced and adopted by the Army as the basis for the development of doctrine for a core competency. Rephrased, the Army improvised and waged irregular warfare, sometimes just regular war against irregulars, when it had to. But that task was always viewed officially as a regrettable diversion from preparation for "real war." Real war, of course, meant war against regular peers, the kind of war that Europeans waged against each other. 
80
Consequently, the Army must provide formal education to leaders down to the Lieutenant level at basic courses on insurgencies, that "must emphasize the "how" to think, to understand the differences and similarities between the two environments (conventional and irregular) and to apply the right approach in the right context at the right time." 
81
82
83
Another educational improvement would be to revise the Army Chief of Staff's professional reading list. While the reading list is vast, totaling in over one hundred books, it would be strengthened with additional works about conventional militaries battling irregular forces. Given the high probability that the Army will once again enter such a conflict, I have recommended the following three books to be added to the list: Invisible Armies: An Epic History of Guerrilla Warfare from Ancient Times to the Present by Max Boot: This book provides an extensive history of guerilla warfare and how conventional armies developed strategies to fight these forces. The book clearly shows that irregular warfare is the most common form of warfare as opposed to conventional conflicts.
Counterinsurgency Warfare by David Galula: The COIN field manual makes several references to Galula's experience and writings about his time as a French officer fighting Algerian guerrillas. Furthermore, most of the principles of FM 3-24 are garnered directly from this book.
The COIN manual can only be understood if one reads Galula's publication first.
No Sure Victory: Measuring U.S. Army Effectiveness and Progress In the Vietnam War by Gregory Daddis: The book describes how the Army, faced with a new kind of enemy and complex problem set, created a strategy ill fit for the war that only worsened the situation. It further goes on to describe the myriad of ways the Army tried to measure success but ultimately failed to develop a mechanism to measure effectiveness for a COIN operation.
Senior leaders should be mandated to read extensively on topics to include the British experience in the Malay such as War of the Running Dogs: Malay, 1948-1969, the Pentagon  Papers, accounts of Mao's movement, the French failures in Indochina and Algeria, and various other historical accounts of insurgencies as to better understand the failures at both the military and civilian levels. This will provide Army senior leaders with an extensive history of insurgent warfare and how militaries devised strategies to counter them. These senior leaders will be better postured to devise more effective strategies in complex population centric environments as they command at the operational and strategic levels. General Peter Bayer admitted to Congress, "in the Army, we still have work to do. One of our lessons learned is, to enable soldiers to effectively operate in the environments we have the last decade, which are center mass of the IW spectrum." 
84
85
86
87
This study is not arguing that the U.S. should avoid improving the conventional warfare capabilities of the U.S. On the contrary, it is important for the Army to follow the guidance from the NDS and address the growing conventional threats from China and Russia. In terms of China, it has grown increasingly more aggressive not only threatening U.S. allies and disrupting the freedom of navigation in the region, but also pursuing major advancements in defense, cyber, and AI to include weaponizing the other domains such as space "through the development of directed-energy weapons." 
89
91
92
"American armed forces might once again find themselves in an insurgency war. It had happened at least once each generation, and rarely by design." 
93
The Army cannot confuse the priorities of the NDS to mean that it no longer needs proficiency in irregular warfare. The new era of Great Power Competition can confuse policy makers into believing that the COIN lessons of Iraq and Afghanistan are not relevant, because the days of major conventional battles are back. This is the most dangerous course of action that deserves a high priority, but it is also less likely because Russia, China, Iran, and other adversaries, have all prioritized countering the U.S. through irregular and limited war. Thus, the Army needs to balance its preparation for both conventional and unconventional warfare. If the Army focuses solely on developing superior firepower and technology, it will again be unprepared for the irregular conflicts of the future. As Congressman Mac Thornberry warned, "the odds are that we are going to be involved in some form of irregular warfare in the future, just as we always have been in the past. We have learned or relearned much about it in the last Coleman 35   decade at a tremendous cost of blood and treasure. It would be incredibly shortsighted of us not to ensure that those lessons are taught, and ingrained, and applied going forward." 
94
The result of this was "radically different approaches taken by different Army divisions in the war. Observers moving from one part of Iraq to another often were struck by how each division was fighting its own war." 41 Gen John Casey, the second commander, tried to force some change and implement COIN training in Iraq through standing up the COIN academy, a two week long crash course in Iraqi culture that proved to be ineffectual because the Army did not institutionally support such training. Furthermore, like Sanchez, Casey's overall military strategy did not coordinate success because it allowed individual commanders to devise their own approach. When commanders, down to the brigade level, are left without doctrine and corresponding guidance they tend to do what they know how to do best, and that was fight a conventional battle. which tracked the number of insurgents the Soldiers killed, and it became a competition across the brigade. Tragically, a few short months into the deployment several of his Soldiers murdered eight unarmed Iraqi men during a major operation. Although Steele was not held responsible for the murders, his overt emphasis on killing as opposed to protecting the populace revealed his overall obliviousness "to the political realities of a counterinsurgency." 43 One of Steele's commanders at the time, Gen Michael Oates, later said that "the story of Colonel Steele and Operation Iron Triangle is about a fundamental difference of opinion about how to prosecute the war in Iraq." 44 In other words, in the absence of strategic guidance, commander's will often resort to what they know and have been trained in. HR McMaster was another brigade commander during the years before Gen. David Petraeus arrived. McMaster, like Steele, operated without specific guidance on how to execute a successful COIN operation.
OMB No. 
0704-0188
U.S. Army ____