# ID: fcbba432469542208148b0cc64ac3070
# Title: Defense in Clausewitz's' On War'and in FM (Field Manual) 100-5 and HDv 100/100.
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1985.0
# Fulltext:
Defense in Clausewitz's On War and in FM 1)0-5 and H'Xv 100/100 by Major Gertnrar~n Sude, GE Arm', 149 pages. This stujdy examines the validity of Clausew~tz's conclusions -about the dleiense on the future battlefied. It discusses the corrqctness i of the adoption of Clausew~tz's ide~as in the operational manuals of ':he American and German Army ' :eld Manual 100-5, Operiat~ois; Army Regul3t ion IO0./100 (H~v 100/100O), Command and Control in eaxtle. arnd the apolicat on o4 NATO's doctrrie in the light of On War. The study deals wit~h the purpose and conduct of defensive operations and ex am i ns soec if ic cr !ter ia, w, h ich make defense a str onger f orm : f :.perat~on than offense. Levels of war and principles of war are toiched on as wellI as the relationsnip of defense and offense.
The stijdy concludes that Clausewitz has great significance fcr the ti-ainng and education of modern officers. Most of his ideas on de'erse are correctly recognized in the rianuals. However, politicil and area restr ic t -ors i n Central Europe do not suppor t Cl ausew itz'E_ ccrs~cderations. Quotations of On War should be made with reservation because the criteria for some of Clausewitz's conclusions hatle changed. The 'ripact of human and more.l factors, which Clausewitz discusses in parts of his writing, is found to be well reflected in FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100.
I owe a great deal of than~ks to a n~umber of people w~ithout Whose h~elp I would have not been able to finish this thests. F'rst, Briciadegeneral An~dreas Broicher, my form'er commander,
who showed me the value Tf military history ar~d taught me how to make use o4 it, Dr. Pobei-t H. Berlin, )istorian, chairman of tre thesis committee and Colonel Wallace B. Eberhard, Ph.D., consulting faculty nember of tiie committee, ga%'e me clear guidance and man-/ helpful r ecomimendat ions.
Lieutenant Colon-?i Gary D. Turner, also a member of * -e committee, invested much time and effort to review my first To all I owe a great debt and express my sincere thanks.
Regiment. 
5
6
7
In October 1806, Clausewitz witnessed the rapid defeat and dissolution of the formerly proud Prussian Army by Napoleonic forces.
As a result of this war, Clausewitz and Prince August were taken to
France as prisoners for one year, a time which Clausewitz used for further studies of the French language and society. It was this Napoleonic experience that insp;red Clausewitz's life and writings and from which he derived many of his ideas, for example the value of
moral +orces, popular support, or a deep hinderland for the defender, which the Russians had. 
9
1 0
1 1
In December 1810, Clausewitz married Countess Marie von Bruhl, to whom he was engaged for more than six years and who played a significant role in publishing Clausewitz's work after his death.) 
2
1 3
Napoleon marched against the Tsar's forces on 22 June 1812. Also, he was witness of the Convention of Tauroggen which was the political beginning of the European independence wars (Befreiungskriege). 1 4   Smaller engagements between Prussian and French forces during 1813 offered good opportunities for Clausewitz to study the i.,pact of tactical maneuvers, initiative, communications, and reinforcement of terrain. 
1 5
16
In 1815, Clausewitz became Ch~ef of Staff of the Prussian General Commando in Koblenz and in May 1818, he was appointed as the Director of the "Allgemeine Kriegsschule* in Berlin, but his duties took up a few hours only and his influence on tactics was very little. 
17
Nothing can better underline the serious and proven background of On War; Clausewitz knew about what he wrote.
Where Clausewitz was born and has been buried, in Burg approximately 50 kms east of the inner German border, and where he spent most of his life, between Koblenz and Berlin, there are the strongest forces in the world today. And in both camps, in the iATO and in the Warsaw Pact, strong efforts are made to adopt Clausewitz's ideas. As iionic as it seems, it is reality: The next war, should it break out in Central Europe, will be fought over his grave under his principles by both sides. 
18
Militir-Strategie, that Lenin studied Clausewitz's On War and fully agreed with the idea that politics should dominate over the military. 19 Sokolowski confirms the validity of this statement expressly and, by doing this, he demonstrates the continuation of a long traditional learning and application of Clausewitz's thoughts including the World War II period in the Russian Army. 
2 0
2 1
Clausewitz's tneories as justification for the c!ass struggle lecause Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels appreciated his book, On War. 
2 2
2 3
operational level of war and the AirLand Battle doctrine. 
2 6
-Yo -.-
The spirit of this manual is mainly characterized by the frequent uise of one of the AirLand Battle's four basic tenets-initiative. 
2 7
Consequently, part two deals with 'Offensive Operations,' demonsta-ting by this order in the table of contents the relative importance of offensive actions over the "Defensive Operations' treated in part three.
Both defense and its relationship to offense wgill be examined thoroughiy in this paper, for the stated main purpose 'of all defensive operations is to create the opportunity to change to the offensive.' 
2 8
side and the desired application of mission-type orders on the other. 
3 1
3 2
3 3
A third difference in the two FMs is the newer manual's explanation of "levels of war." FM 100-5 (1976) entails no specific consideration of strategic or tactical levels of operations in war.
Although the words tactical and strategic are used a few times in connection with airmobility (airmobile, airlift), purpose of defense S.
.. ' '
(to retain tactical, strategic, or political objectives), counterintelligence, and nuclear operations, there is no further definition or delimitation of levels on which defense or offense are fought. 
3 4
3 6
The last clear and remarkable difference between the two manuals is that the newer version treats the principles of war comprehensively and in detail -a renaissance of military rules. 
3 7
Both manuals state in their prefactory remarks their consistence with the commitment to the Alliance. 3 9   Before studying HDv 100/100 deeper and reviewing its essence, one should take a brief look at its predecessor, the HDv 100 /1,   Truppenfdhrung (issued Oct 1962), to show details of development. 
4 0
4 1
1. The condition of a nuclear environment and the effects of nuclear fire became important factors of battlefield considerations and defensive planning.  64 shows the significance and purpose of principles clearly:
".
no formulas exist for the battlefield. However, precise principles must guide any Commander. principles of this regulation apply to the command and control of units from Corps level on down." 
4 7
1. Although one has to anticipate war under nuclear conditions, the focus on nuclear fire is not as strong as in HDv 100/1; there is no longer a specific chapter about nuclear warfare.
A precise definition of command and control has been omitted; HDv 100/200, F6hrungssystem des Heeres,--another manual of 12 ° . .
x.
-*-o.....
. the German Army--contains a definition ("Command and Control is guiding and operating influence on the behavior of people to accomplish a given mission, it includes also the employment of material means. . . ), but that is far from the prior manual's regard of command and control as an art; command and control has become a ,:ooletely comnercial or managerial attitude, which regards persons as figures and sees efficiency as the center of all efforts. The speci4ic chapter on leadership in the newer manual cannot replace the spirit of the former one describing command and control as an art. 
4 8
5 0
4
5
(Fihnrich 0 is a German rank between Cadet and Second Lieutenant). (Hereby Clausewit2 gives a good example for modern officers).      The answer is "no" again. The Federal Court denied the Green Part,'s petition to prohibit those weapons systems and rejected its suit. 
2
..-. .2i' ,.,'  to a strategy comprising other areas also 
' 6
8
7
10
"end" on this level, Clausewitz believes, is concerned with the war itself and -in a final stage -the "ends" may be those objectives, which should lead directly to peace. 
1 1
"12
1
related to that specific level has to be conducted; for the standpoint is different, because the 4means and "ends" are not the same. 
13
He denies expressly that victory is the end on this level; he believes the strategic success is a series of victories on the tactical level and finally the whole exploitation of the military operations on the political level. Author's interpretation of the "mean-end" relationship in On War
The French philosopher, Raymond Aron, a great supporter of Clausewitz's ideas, writes that Clausewitz's considerations on 'means" in tactics and strategy can easily be understood, but that it is difficult to determine exactly the wends' of both levels.
Although he agrees that Clausewitz has clearly separated the political stage from the military strategic level, Aron concludes that on this level in strategy 'peace' also becomes an Pend." 
15
Clausewitz has more problems with the delimitations of the strategic and tactical levels. There are several statements which - (2) In Book Three, Chapter 13, he expresses the difficulty of determining whether a Corps in the reserve is a force on the strategic or -the tactical level.
(3) In Book Five, Chapter 13, he cannot precisely delineate if the preparation and provision o+: quarters is a matter of strategy car tactics.
In Book Six, Chapter 1, Clausewitz introduces the term "1campaign" on the strategic level, because he needs a military operation between "engagement* and 'war,n since the distance in time, space, and force is too great between these two.
One can justifiably argue that Clausewitz had sometimes reached the conclusion that there should be a third military level, since some issues do not fit completely on the strategic or tactical 17 .. . level, but he did not define a new one expressly.-.
FM 100-5 (issue 1982) contains--in contrast to its predecessor (issued in 1976)--a clear definitiion and description of levels of war. A short definition of war itself ("war is a national undertaking which must be coordinated from the highest levels of policymaking to the basic levels of execution*) is followed by a separate explanation of three military levels on which war is prepared and conducted. 
1 8
The application of this additional level is broadly supported by US officers. Colonel W. P. Franz, for instance, in an article written at Army War College, recommends a new military level between stratecy and tactics, which he called "grand tactical;" also, several authors writing in Military Review after having analyzed the threat, new technology, the Vietnam and World War II experiences, and the need for initiatit.e demand the consistent and immediate application of the operational level. The idea is "to fill the gap between strategy and tactics" in order to achieve a better definition of the complex relationship between doctrine, forces, levels of operations, and aims) 9
The "meanso on the tactical, operational, and strategic levels are of the same type, and differ only in size; thus FM 100-5 states that the application of force or its threat in general is the "mean" on the strategic level, while the size of the units involved determines the level below. That is, larger units operate on the operational level, smaller units on the tactical.
Where a separation or an overlapping of both levels is concerned, the manual cannot be easily understood. In Chapter Two it says that "At Corps and division, operational and tactical levels are not clearly separable." In Chapter Seven the AirLand Battle doctrine is introduced, which "distinguishes the operational level of war--
the :onduct of campaigns and large-unit actions--from the tactical level" and provides man innovative approach to fighting at both the Field Circular 100-5 gives a more consistent explanation; it classifies corps and division on both the operational and tactical levels and statesas a major difference -the application of naneuver on the higher and of firepower on the lower level.21
The "ends" of the military levels range from victories in engagements or battles to objectives of national policy (for better Author's interpretation of the "mean-endu relationship in FM 100-5
The German Army manual HOv 100/100 contains neither a definition of levels of ,jar nor an explanation of levels on which ,inil tary actions of a specific type can be conducted. For unexolained reasons, the German Army no longer recognizes the four well defined levels of the former manual HDv 100/1; it had distinguished between one political level (noberste F~hrung") and three military levels with a direct link to a unit-level: "obere Fb'hrung" on corps level and higher, "mittlere Fuhrung" on division and brigade level, "untere F1hrung" on regiment level and below. 
2 3
2 4
Clausewitz distinguishes clearly between two military levels (strategic and tactical) by using the "mean-end" relationship.
While HDv 100/100 does not identify military levels of war, FM 100-5 identifies three of them, adding the operational level between strategy and tactics. Although FM 100-5 also uses the "mean-end" reiation, all references to Clausewitz should be made with reservation when issues on the operational level are concerned Defense on strategic. operational. and tactical levels At the beginning of Book Six, which deals with "Defense" and is the most comprehensive of all eight books, Clausewitz explains the concept and the major characteristic of defense in general: "The parrying of a blow' is its concept and 'awaiting the blow" is its characteristic. 
2 6
2 7
28
and authors of the so-called peace movement do not differentiate between several levels on which defense and offense can be conducted when condemning structure and equipment of NATO countries and the AirLand Battle doctrine; they simply attach tactical weapons to the strategic level or aim their political view directly to tactics instead of military strategy. 
3
How do the field manuals reflect the Clausewitzian idea of an echelonment of defense? FM 100-5 provides--shown above--by clear distinction and application of levels, the prerequisite for attaching defensive and offensive operations to specific levels. Some statements such as "war . . . must be coordinated from the highest levels cf policymaking to the basic levels of execution," "a successful defense consists of reactive and offensive elements.
. 
On Nos. 2761-2763, the purpose of those counterattacks is explained in more detail at the brigade, dlvision, and corps levels. 
3 3
3 4
3 5
3
But while Clausewitz refers his ideas almost exclusively to the stage
• %° -. "
..-.--of an actual war, the general emphasis today lies on deterrence, in Darticular that means in a pre-war period. The White Paper 1983 of the German Government states that "the paramount objective of NATO's strategy is to prevent war through deterrence." 
3 8
3 9
4 1
4 2
the object of defense to protect the country from losses; the object must be a favorable peace. "4 But when he continues he does not neglect the effect of lost terrain; he compares the positive e4fect
of an increasing strength of the friendly force by their withdrawal
. -
with the negative result of a lost valuable area; he then concludes that the greatest disadvantage would occur if the area is lost and forces and war material too. 
4 3
because "if engagements of this type become too frequent, it obviously indicates an unfavorable strategic situation." 4 4   There should be no doubt that NATO is and must be politically a defensive alliance; this was pointed out again by the Heads of State and Government in June 1982 ('None of our weapons will ever be used except in response to attack'). 
4 5
(1) It has to be seen as a great merit of Clausewitz to distinguish between levels of war, to define them, to develop the "mean-endo relationship, and to consider offensive actions within a defense on higher level. He expressly denied a constant and complete defensive scenario, because otherwise victories in engagements or battles cannot be achieved to support the strategic or political interest. One could easily compare this view with a soccer or a football game in which one side (in Clausewit,'s terms "we, the defender') would not be allowed to score; we had to play with a high chance of losing, a slight chance of drawing, but with no chance of winning!
(2) Both Clausewitz's levels of war and his defense refer to the actual state of war; while FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100 stress the
significance of deterrence in a pre-war period, Clausewitz does not consider such a defensive mission for forces. 4
(3) Clausewitz's distinction between one political and two military levels of war has not been included in the Armies' manuals.
HDv 100/100 neither distinguishes between nor defines specific b. Clausewitz talks about "Mittel" and "Zweck;" while the translation of 'Mittel" to 'means' is absolutely correct, the term "'Zweck* has been translated variously. Howard & Paret use very often 'end' (e.g., p. 142-143), but also 'object" (e.g., p. 128) or 'purpose" (e.g., p. 87, p. 90).
If there should be a different meaning of Nend,' Nobject," or 'purpose' in English, in German "Zweck" has only one meaning: it answers the questions with "whys or "for what."
Within this thesis the term "end' is prefered. c. it is not correct, when a CIA member and former Naval Warfare College student concludes that Clausewitz made a "lip services when acknowledging the primacy of political over military goals. By using secondary literature instead of a basic issue of On War he proves his incompetence of evaluating Clausewitz's ideas, see: On War (Engl) uses on p. 143, "original' as an adjective, but in Vom Krieoe (German) 'ursprUnglich' is used as an adverb; thus, in English it should be read as:
'originally the means . . .
In the same paragraph on p. 143, in On War, we find the term .. . in the final analysis;' that is not the same as Clausewitz meant, he said ". .. in letzter Instanz," which could be translated as . . . in the final stage' (see Vom Krieoe, p. 293). ~.-.
-..
A significant point, which could lead t o a basic misunderstanding of a Clausewitzian idea is the translation of "Die Strategie ist der Gebrauch des Gefechts zum Zweck des Krieges" (Vom Kriene, p. 345); when Howard & Paret translate *strategy is the use of the engagement for the purpose of the war' (On War. p. 177) they do not meet Clausewitz's intention; the use of the English genitive is misleading. It should be translated as follows:
"strategy is the use of the engagement for war as its purpose.-121bid., p. 158.     (Within this article about the Chief of German Army, an official opinion of the Green Party is published). 3 1 FM 100-5, p. 2-3, p. 10-1.   321bid., p. 10-4.  Marine Corps Gazette, September 1983, vol. 67, no. 9  September 1984, vol. 123, no. 3, p.   Ralph H. Peters, Jr., "Forward Defence: Time to Break the Concrete?" Army, March 1983, p. 31, p. 35.  (Peters compares NATO's forward defense concept with the French MAGINOT-Line; he concludes that the only possibility to overcome the restrictions by area is to extend the battlefield on enemy territory; but this border crossing operation is not in accordance with NATO's aim of restoring territory only).  .............. (Defense) deals also, in many chapters, with "the attack," (see Annex
This indicates that Clausewitz did not regard defense or offense in isolation, but that he tried to point out facts of transition and delimitations between these two forms of combat, and that offense can be a part of defense.
Nevertheless, the reader will notice, without deep analysis, that Clausewitz gives the defense a subjective preference by using the "we" form; "we"--on the one defending side--in contrast to the "invader."
In Book One, which Clausewitz himself saw as revised, he distinguishes between attack and defense as the only two forms of action in war, which have different characteristics and unequal strength. 
2
type of operation. Thus, in defensive engagements the purpose could be to defend a locality or an object, and in the offense it could be the conquest of a locality or an object. 
4
Clausewitz explains these purposes in a detailed specific form, he develops his picture of defense in Book Six more generally. The concept of defense, he says, is "the parrying of a blow;" its characteristics are "awaiting the blow," and its purpose is "preservation." 
5
6
When the defender feels strong enough, he has to apply the offense with its positive purpose which can still be seen as a part of the intended defense, since a pure defense does not exist in Clausewitz's opinion, but it must contain an offensive counterreaction. 
7
1 0
If a final and total victory could be achieved by offensive actions on lower levels only within an overall defense, no difference between offense and defense would exist in strategy, Clausewitz believes. 
1 1
1
Clausewitz believes that the invader has won when he succeeds in reaching the defender's main body of forces and can hit the defender effectively. Since there is more room and depth in strategy than in tactics to maneuver with the forces, Clausewitz gives the defender strategically a great opportunity to avoid such an unfavorable situation by withdrawing, using depth of the theater, and splitting the attacking force. The offender will therefore hardly be able to proceed to the defender's vital center. Thus, Clausewitz reveals a useful general guidance for a pattern of distribution of forces on the entire battlefield and he provides some ideas on strength and location of strategic reserve forces.
Another rather complex but detailed argument for the 
Figure 
3
waits until the enemy appears, and attacks him first.
Friendly army moves into position close to the frontier, waits until the enemy appears, and attacks him after he has launched his attack.
4. Friendly army waits for the enemy, withdraws into the interior of its country, constantly weakens the advancing enemy, waits until he is exhausted, and finally resists him. 
1 7
The most surprising aspect seems to be that Clausewitz is explaining defense but attacking in three forms of its conduct. He defires the attack of the friendly army, which is in case one and two actually a pre-emptive attack and in case three a counterattack, as the 'sword of the defender' for destroying the enemy. Only in case four Clausewitz, inspired by the Napoleonic experience, anticipates an enemy's defeat by his own exertions and a final blow of the defender; this idea demands that one has to count the final counteroffensive of the defender as belonging to defense. 
1 8
1 9
(1) The Clausewitzian defense contains both offensive and withdrawing act ions.
(2) The factors of space, time, and forces are very significant parameters of defense. (3) As shown in Chapter 2, the political and area restrictions on defense in Central Europe do not allow the application of concept one, two and four of Clausewitz's types of resistance; only type three, which he regards as not the best possibility, seems to be applicable.
When Clausewitz writes, 'A sudden powerful transition to the offense--the flashing sword of vengence--is the greatest moment for the defense," he applies one of the four basic tenets of the AirLand Battle doctrine--initiative. 
2 4
In three different parts of -'
On War, he encourages the defender to 'operate against the enemy's lines of communication" and to conduct 'raids and diversions into enemy territory.' 
2 5
~---- about Military Forces, that the defender enjoys a great logistical advantage over the attacker, who is saddled with longer lines of communi cat ion. 26
The culminating point. When the defender is able to withdraw and to cause the invader to extend the distance to his natural bases more and more, his strategic offense will reach a state Clausewitz called the "culminating point." That is the point in time at which the enemy's advance has weakened the attacker and strengthened the defender in such a way that the power of the invader "is just enough to maintain a defense and wait for peace.0 
27
2 8
2 9
3 0
(I) The enemy's losses or his exhaustion were for Clausewitz not a particular purpose of defense, but the way to achieve an early "culminating point.' 
3 1
32
FM 100-5 defines many purposes for defense, but makes it difficult for the reader to understand the complex subject. While the manual explains at the beginning of Chapter 2 about "Combat Fundamentals" that "the object of all operations is to destroy the opposing force," it limits the effective range of defense in the introduction of Chapter 10 about "Fundamentals of the Defense": "The defense denies success to an attacking enemy.  Compared with Clausewitz's most favored type of defense, the similarity is great; gaining time, marshalling forces for counterattack, and wearing down the enemy are identical ideas. By demanding that a force controls terrain instead of holding terrain as a purpose of defense, FM 100-5 maintains the option to withdraw and avoids operational restrictions due to the area. 
3 9
draw the enemy into an unfavorable position.40
. * .
Although FM 100-5 deals with offense and defense in different parts, It sees, as Clausewitz did, a close relation between these two main forms of military operations, ". . . the distinction between defensive and offensive operations are made primarily on their
intended purposes rather than on the types of combat actions they undertake. 
"4 1
The The manual states that corps and divisions should fight "a unified air-land defense' on the operational level, and this defense consists of five elements:
• A continuous deep battle operation in the area of influence forward of own troops.
, A covering force operation to support the main effort.
A main effort in the main battle area.
. . Reserve operations in support of the main effort. 
43
simultaneously within one defense: The deep battle, the main battle, and the rear area battle. The former commander of the 2d Armored Division, Major General Woodmansee, concludes in analyzing FM 100-5
that it is no longer sufficient at division ard corps level to "fight the traditional battle along the front lines' only, but that it is .
necessary to conduct operations also in friendly and enemy rear areas, which are of the same importance; only an "offensive-minded * warfare in the sense of striking the attacking enemy deep and seizing the initiat~ve will achieve future success. 
4 4
45
4 7
'Defensive operations--seize the tactical initiative locally and then generally as the entire force shifts from defense to attack." 
4 8
4 9
5 0
5
.% . . . . Clausewitzian lesson is to go to the offense when superiority is achieved and not earlier, which does not preclude, however, to strive for initiative by all kinds of active measures on lower levels. 
5 2
5 3
5 4
5 5
Right at the beginning of the part about each military operation the manual explains precisely their specific purposes and delimits defense, attack, and delay. 
5 6
Delay Defense Attack
To gain time, To hold an To destroy Purpose:
to weaken area the enemy, the enemy to gain ground Figure 
4
5 7
5 8
The greatest similarity between delay and defense and simultaneously a strong demarcation to offense is the possibility of conducting different forms of operations on lower levels. While -.
during an offense, generally all forces belonging to that attacking level are actually in the offense, the characteristics of defense and delay are the conduct of delaying, defensive, and offensive operations of parts of subordinated forces. One can regard this as the doctrinal basis for an active defense and delay. 
6 2
6 3
.
at the German General Staff College that HDv 100/100 provides sufficient elements to operate actively, although the strategy of forward defense and the aefense's main purpose put restrictions on German Army Commanders; he believes the secret of a successful defense lies in the optimal use of terrain concerning both depth and width and in the application of initiative; by this the command and control leve~s cf companies, battalions, and brigades have high signi.ficance in the defense. 6 4   Initiative, which is inherent in German doctrine on all levels, becomes the very factor to overcome battlefield restrictions and achieve the weakening effect on the attacker; a defensive system is only immobile and inflexible if it is accompanied by a 'ack of initiative 65
Besides discussing the tactical use of terrain and initiative, HOv 100/100 applies other techniques to achieve or maintain activity in defense. Those elements comprise the constant use of a main effort, tolerating gaps, forming reserves, conduct of counterattacks, and fighting the deep battle.
Both the creation of a main effort, which is required in every operation, and the possible toleration of gaps enable the Commander to fight outnumbered and concentrate his forces at the decisive point.
Clausewitz favors the same idea. 
6 6
for example, the idea of an employment of long-range air force and .
artillery assets or of electronic warfare reveal a guidance of thinking and striking deep. 
68
6 9
7 2
Recommendat ion.
Having analyzed Clausewitz's imagination about defense in particular and its relation to offense and seeing the frequent public ortlichen Lage" with "advantage of position;" closer to Clausewitz's thought is the term "support of the area," in which one part is the "advantage of position." 71bid., p. 358 (Howard & Paret translate the German words "negativ" and "positiv" as "passive" and "active" and stress, by doing this, more the way of conduct of defense than its impacet.) Although Clausewitz declared in a personal note only Chapter I of Book One as revised and finished, he proves in that writing the correctness of an important conclusion of the unrevised Book Six: the theory of "defense as the stronger form with the negative purpose and attack as the weaker form with the positive purpose." See p. 70, 71. 
Ibid., p. 10-3. Thus, when the manual uses terms like "to hold a specific area" (p. 12-1) or "to retain terrain" (p. 11-9, static defense on tactical level) it is either in contrast to the listed purpose of defense or must count as "retain tactical, strategic, or political objectives" (see p. 10-3). 40 1bid., p. 12-1. 
4
Although the German Army Officer E. Vad counts correctly the final counteroffensive belonging to the Clausewitzian defense, he misinterprets in saying that "preservation" in On War is the same as "protecting an area against atcacks"; in the sense of Clausewitz "preservation" can only be understood to forces and not to an area. 
60
basically we should regard principles of war and then, in a second step, examine which of them supports or is especially applicable to defensive operations.
(2) Principles can exist in various forms. Bernard Brodie's idea of two conceptions of principles seems to be very helpful;
principles of war, he states, are formulated either broadly 'as a general body of knowledge" or was a particular list of maxims. 
"
6
7
8
In additiion to the three purposes above, Alger mentions the advantage of principles for study and understanding of complex disciplines of science, but he denies this process for principles of war; he says they cannot be expressed as algebraic rules or philosophic truths. Concerning the idea of forming military principles in algebraic rules Alger is right, but with regard to philosophic truths he apparently neglects Clausewitz's intent. He
has searched expressly for theories of war which can explain the art of war and can be expressed as simple rules. 
1 0
(1) to support the training of soldiers
(2) to facilitate the conduct of military operations. 
We can find six remarks or conclusions in On War having the character of principles if we regard content, form, and purpose.
(I) Superiority of Defense (3) Active Defense
Both in On War and in the "principles" booklet, Clausewitz visualizes an active defense. 
1 4
1 6
Clausewitz believes that at the tactical level these actions belong within a defensive scenario.
(4) Main Effort
On various occasions, Clausewitz mentions the need for and the location of a main effort or a strength at the decisive point. Analyzing Napoleon's defeat in 1814, Clausewitz claims that the conqueror did not see the "center of gravity" laying with Prussia's Field Marshal Blicher. 
1 7
1 8
1 9
(5) Reserves Keeping forces in reserve and employing them play a major role in Clausewitz's considerations. He taught the Crown Prince--as the second principle for defense--'Not to bring all our troops into combat immediately" and continued this subject in the fifth principle, explaining where these forces should be held: not directly behind the front lines, but far enough back to avoid an enemy's envelopment of our total force. 
20
2 3
2 4
Clausewitz's major reference to defense is contained in his chapter about defensive positions in On War. Here he indicates that surprising courses of action, which meet a disconcerted enemy, provide mainly teavnaeo fns.5Surprise can be achieved best, he says, with a "rapid use of our forces." Although Clausewitz mentions it separately, this idea should not be regarded as an additional principle; the author is talking here about surprise. .
This discussion illustrates that Clausewitz did understand principles and he wrote about them. He mentions principles expressly and explains them both in On War and in the "principles" booklet. Superiority of defense, simplicity, active defense, main effort, reserves, and surprise can surely be derived as principles and have a great impact when applied in defense. Therefore, we cannot agree with Alger's interpretation of Clausewitz and his relationship to principles. For example, Alger states that Clausewitz "has been spuriously labeled a prime contributor to the modern concept of principles of war;" even he fails to mention Clausewitz in his :
comprehensive list of sources showing the chronological development of principles. 
2 7
6
"movement" has changed to umaneuver," "cooperation" to "unity of command"--both changes are certainly the result of the U.S. Army's experience during the past years.
2. The order of the principles, which indicates an order of significance, has also changed during the past decades; for example, the principles f. through i. However, the Oobjective" has always been No. between the application of the principle of "objective" in strategy or in tactics. 
3 7
"In the tactical dimension, this principle suggests that the superior combat powor r must be concentrated at the decisive place and time in order to achieve decisive results." 
38
Two separate statements address this apparent contradiction in the Simplicity and surprise are identical principles in each source.
Offensive in FM 100-5 is closely related to the active defense in Clausewitz--initiative is the key purpose.
Mass, and to some extent, economy of force in FM 100-5 have much in common with Clausewitz's main effort; each of these requires what Clausewitz called the "judgement" of the commander.
Forces in reserve, which for Clausewitz is the key to success, is not one of the principles listed in FM 100-5; however, the U.S. Army's manual does not neglect the idea; it simply sees this -principleu as a means to achieve others such as offensive or surprise, and this seems entirely reasonable. 
4 0
that one can derive from On War that is not strongly reflected in FM 100-5 is the superiority of defense. The reason could be the different interpretation of purposes of defense as shown in Chapter
Purpose of principles in FM 100-5
The purpose of the U.S. Army's manual, to which principles of war make a major contribution, is very clearly stated in its introduction: 'FM 100-5 provides operational guidance for use by commanders and trainers at all echelons.' These intentions are fully consistent with the purposes of principles earlier developed:
Supporting training and facilitating conduct of warfare. 
4 1
for planning and acting as operations officers; within the war gaming method for each course of action as a step in the decision-making process, the principles play a key role. They belong to the so-called significant factors which have to be considered for each of the possible courses of act ion. 
42
(1) The application of principles occurs in the form of "general m principles only. This is a change from the former manual, which used principles without a generic adjective. 
4 6
Active defense (2702/2712), fire and movement (2703), reserves " (2707), use of terrain (2705). We find principles--simplicity, surprise, active defense, mopvement, and reserves--which Clausewitz stated also.
(2) 'Creative, precise, and critical thinking" comes directly from On War. To prevent friendly military operations from becoming predictable, decisions should not be provided by formulas or methods, but by clear judgement.
(3) General principles are the framework for peacetime exercises and training. They provide a common understanding of tactical concepts and ideas for all officers and offer thereby the soil for the application of mission-type-orders. The content of No.
1004 on general principles seems to be a mirror of Clausewitz's , thoughts as far as purpose of principles and mental training of officers is concerned.
(1) Principles exist in the form of a list or of a broader explanation; Clausewitz used both conceps, FM 100-5 prefers a listed form, and HDv 100/100 a more general description. Both manuals are partly in accordance with Clausewitz. However, when one quotes principles, one should mention the deviation.
(2) The manuals do not apply the principles exactly as Clausewitz intended. While HDv 100/100 uses the principles as a framework, FM 100-5 makes use of them as a guideline. Clausewitz taught the use of both methods.
(3) Certain principles such as surprise, simplicity, and 4
active defense exist in FM 100-5, HDv 100/100, and in Clausewitz's writings. Especially the striving for initiative by making use of "windows of opportunities" for counterattacks on the tactical level is a fundamental Clausewitz idea; it is truely reflected in both manuals.
'4) Clausewitz has separated principles for defense and offense in his writings. In FM 100-5, all types of operations are covered by all principles; in HDv 100/100, some principles--in general form--deal with all types of operations, while some deal only with defense, offense, or delay.
Having studied Alger's chronological compendium of the evolution of principles, we can see that they were originally formulated in times when waging war was an accepted political act;  Although the best commanders of defense operations since
Hannibal's times had always tried "to fit their forces to the ground," it is Clausewitz who deserves credit for defining the precise value of terrain. 
4
5
6
the need to restrict access because of classification, and the need to become familiar with the terrain preplanned for warfare.
Clausewitz, who understood terrain in terms of "commanding positions, mountains, rivers, woods, and roads," said that it affects the battle constantly to some extent. 
7
8
9
•--Clausewitz concludes--with current validity--that the principal effect of terrain lies more on the tactical than on the strategic level; also, he suggests, the "smaller the country, and the less room.
. for evasive movements," the more importance fortified and entrenched positions have. The significance of those terrain reinforcements has not changed today. 0 In Clausewitz's opinion, the tactical value of terrain is provided by three advantages: "as an obstacle to the approach, as an impediment to visibility, and as cover from fire." 
1 1
1 2
However, such a definition as key area must be seen in the light of *he desired result of the whole operation: If the purpose of a defensive operation is to retain certain terrain, the loss of it is naturally a defeat.14 Therefore, one must see the close connection between the designation of a "key area" and the objective of the operation.
FM 100-5 contains a specific subchapter about terrain in general and deals in Chapter 11 ("The Defense") with terrain aspects referred only to defense. 
1 5
Clausewitz. 16
2 2
2 5
As a last element of German Army defense worth mentioning is the key to victory: the selection of "key terrain."
In the meaning identical with the U.S. Army manual's udecisive terrain' rather than its Okey terrain," the HDvIOO/100 believes that the constant possession or control of a defined 'key terrain" is "decisive for the success of the defense."  The "support of the population," which Clausewitz understands primarily as the employment of the militia and the effect of arming the population, especially strengthens the defense if the battle is fought on the defending country's ground. 
2 9
3 0
3 1
Clausewitz tried to link the Prussian population closer to its army through the militia to make the defense a subject of the country as a whole and not of a standing force only. 
3 2
3 3
would, therefore, be a disadvantage in his most favored form of resistance, he hopes that this result will not occur if soldiers and people know sufficiently the military plans and the intended purposes 34w of defensive operations. 
3 4
3 5
"the skill of the commander, the experience and courage of the troops, and their patriotic spirit.' 
36
3 7
3 8
3 9
4 0
'The primary function of leadership,' the manual concludes, is to inspire and to motivate soldiers to do difficult things in trying circumstances.' 
"The soldier's readiness to serve and, in wartime, even to risk his life is closely interrrelated with the will of the people as a whole to defend the integrity of its State and of its free and democratic constitutional order.'4 HDv 100/100 admits no doubt that the will of the population is of great significance for soldiers to accomplish their missions. In particular in Chapter 13 about "psychological defense" the manual deals with the relationship between the people's mood and the soldiers' motivation. "The mood of the population influences the spirit of the forces and its behavior can be important for the course of operations,'HDv 100/100 says and it continues "the enemy will try to drive a wedge between the forces and the population.. Thus, one can see thatHDv 100/100 recognizes Clausewitz's idea about popular support; because the German Army still applies the conscription system, it has a strong natural link to the population and mirrors its opinions. Abok all, the civil defense, as part of an overall defense, can only work f, the majority of the people agree to military measures. 
4 4
4 5
service and encourage him to perform his duties faithfully. 
"4 6
The Clausewitzian conclusion that defense is a stronger form  predominating sources of what he calls friction in war. "Friction is the only concept that more or less corresponds to the factors that distinguish real war from war on paper," Clausewitz says, and he dedicates a whole chapter in Book One to this subject. 
4 8
4 9
5 0
5
But above all Clausewitz demands that a leader must have superior intellect and strength of character to act on instinct or by intuitive judgement when making a military decision. 
5 2
5 3
5 4
5 9
6 0
'quick-minded, flexible leaders who can act faster than the enemy"
and who know about friction in war. In particular, the manual makes .
a close link to Clausewitz in mentioning the need for "mental flexibility" and the ability "to think on their feet, n which reminds 4
one obviously of the sound military judging and intelligent officers Clausewitz had in mind. 
6 1
6 2
In the chapter on defense, HOv 100/100 recognizes that holding terrain, which is a major purpose of German Army's defense, demands in particular besides the steadfastness of the troops, the resolute will of commanders to fight until a decision is reached. impact on military operations an effective leader has. Leaders who have an especially strong will and sufficient mental capacity are seen as mandatory prerequisites for success.
Clausewitz and nuclear warfare FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100 dictate that the armies must be capable of fighting any type of military operation under nuclear conditions. 
6 5
6 6
6 7
Concerning the great effect of fire and destruction of modern nuclear weapons, Clausewitz makes an interesting statement about the amount of force in his revised Chapter One of Book One: "War is an act of force and there is no logical limit to the application of 109 The distinction between limited and unlimited warfare that Clausewitz makes is not applicable with regard to nuclear weapons, for the difference between these two types of war is not discussed in terms of the armament used but by the objective of the war. 
7 3
This discussion of a possible relationship between Clausewitz and nuclear warfare reveals that On War delivers little evidence --having validity under nuclear conditions. Four considerations are p worth mentioning:
(1) War remains a political act even if nuclear weapons are used. l
(2) A theory of "nuclear deterrence" cannot clearly be drawn from On War.
(3) Employment of strategic nuclear weapons, even in defense, does not meet Clausewitz's thoughts where time, forces, and area during a military engagement are concerned.
(4) Only the use of tactical nuclear weapons in the sense of .
an enhanced firepower fits into Clausewitzian considerations about military operations, since he sees no limit on employing the maximum possible force. . (The traditional terrain walks of German Army General Staff Officer classes have their origin in the era of Clausewitz, Scharnhorst, and Gneisenau; the idea is to make the officers familiar with specific terrain and practice the capability of evaluating it.) 
4
Too much should not be read in Clausewitz, nor should more be expected of him than he intended to give. It remains the measure of his genius that, although the age for which he wrote is long since past, he can still provide so many insights relevant to a generation, the nature of whose problems he could not possibly have foreseen.
relevant for modern warfare. The significance of On War lies in its comprehensive analysis of military incidents of the time before Clausewitz and during his life; based on military history Clausewitz draws fundamental conclusions with great influence even today. 
4
Clausewitz states for all times the prevalence of politics in war and with regard to war; he defines war as a political act. This idea has become one of common basic recognition both in FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100. T s means that all operations, defensive as well as offensive, must be seen in the light of an overall political goal.
The operations themselves contribute to this goal by the "mean-end" relationship clearly shown in On War and FM 100-5. 
5
6
In particular, the terrain situation for the NATO forces in Central Europe is different from Clausewitz's strongest form of defense; in On War the defending army has the advantage of a large and deep land area, but in Central Europe the Warsaw Pact, a potential attacker has this considerable advantage.
Most of Clausewitz's ideas of On War are well adopted.
FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100 recognize well most of Clausewitz's ideas on defense and demand their application in future war. There are, however, some facts about which the manuals hold different views.
In those cases the manuals should omit quotations of On War, or should use them only with additional explanation.
7
Points in accordance with On War:
(1) FM 100-5 distinguishes between different levels of war Y and can therefore logically explain the conduct of offensive operations on lower levels within an overall defense. One has to see, however, that Clausewitz discussed only the strategic and tactical levels, while FM 100-5 adds a third military level of war between themthe operational level.
(2) FM 100-5 explains two major types of operations, the defense and offense. As Clausewitz does, the manual counts withdrawal and retrograde operations as part of the defense.
(3) Both FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100 recognize the need for a deep battle and enormous activity on the tactical level to achieve successful defense.
(4) The impact of friction in war is mentioned in both manuals. They both also stress the great influence of moral factors, support of the population, and leadership. FM 100-5 and HDv 100/100 clearly state that without sufficiently motivated soldiers and without the support of the people a country's defense will not lead to victory.
(5) A key element in Clausewitz's thoughts about the defense being stronger than the offense is the intell igent and enterprising leader. This ideal of an officer, capable of sound and intuitive judgement and able to gain and retain initiative in defensive operations, is stressed both in FM 100-5 and HDv I001I00.9 (6) HDv 100/100 contains no specific list of principles of war or principles of defense, but explains some of them in general form. Their application is required in the sense of On War where principles build a framework in which leaders with sound judgement have to make decisions dependent upon the specific situation.
Points not in accordance with On War:
(1) HDv 100/100 does not distinguish between different levels of war; therefore a systematic "mean-end" relationship is not -'"-123 explained. Thus, it seems to be difficult to understand the connection of different missions, objectives, and operations on several levels of command and control and their interdependence.
(2) HDv 100/100 explains three major types of military operations; in addition to the defense and offense of On War, it also discusses delay. Delay and defense together, however, are nearly identical to Clausewitz's defense where conduct and secondary purposes are concerned.
(3) The main purpose of the defense in On War ("destruction of the enemy") is the same as for the offense.     
8
.strategic, tactical; see p. 50).
2 6  
2 6  
Army thinking; they are subjects often discussed in military publications. The article of General Starry, at that time Commander, US Army Training and Doctrine Command, in Military Review in March 1981 ('Extending the Battlefield") can be regarded as the official 4 .. doctrinal continues, 'begin well forward and proceed aggressively from there to destroy enemy assault echelons and at the same time to slow . . . 57 ZI 4 . . °4 *l 'L. . . .. . . . .. . ..... . . . . . . . . . .
8 1bid., p. 94. 91bid., p. 19 1bid., p. 94; hereby Clausewitz makes clear that he has no intent of conducting a so-called "social defense," a type of defense without any military response to the threat. 2 0 1bid., p. Verlag E. S. Mittler & Sohn, Herford und Bonn, 1984, p.
* on all levels; see: Major R. S. Evans, "The Need for Offensive Operations on Land.' Journal of the Royal United Services Institute for Defence
* on all levels; see: Major R. S. Evans, "The Need for Offensive Operations on Land.' Journal of the Royal United Services Institute for Defence
becomes
3
6
•.. -. . . .. . -".... . .--. * .j .. ,. d,.... . .,.. .. . . will likely not be committed in an area, where a "traditional defense -in-depth strategy" can be fought. See: Donn A. Starry, "Extending the Battlefield," Military Review, March
1bid. p, 343. 1 bdpp. 411-412.
7FM~ 100-5, p. B-Ilff.3 8 Clausewi t2, Principles of War, p. 12ff, and see: Carl von Clausewitz, The Most Important Principles of War for the Conauct of War, in: The Art of War by Jomini, principles of war by Clausewitz, published by Art of War Colloquium at the U.S. Army War College.
8 HDv 100/200, No. 101 (author's translation).HDv 100/100, Chap. 7.1. (leadership and education).4  HDv 100/100, Chap.6-14, 27, 30, 33.    
0 Meinhardt Glanz, 'Ansprache des Inspekteurs des Heeres vor Offzieranwirtern." (Dokzent-Bw Nr. Ha4206), lecture at German Army Officers School, 12 Jan 1982, p. 5.
-a.. .
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, p. 128. 1 0 1bid., p. 142. 1 1 lbid., p. 143, p. 177.Again, there are three translations which do not completely reflect Clausewitz's ideas in English:
3 Der Bundeminister der Verteidigung, Fihrungsstab des Heeres IV 4, Heeresdienstvorschrift (HDv) 100/1 T-uppenfUhrunq (Bonn, 25 Oktober 1962), Nr. 53-55.2 4 The Federal Minister of Defense, Army Staff -III 6. Army
3 HDv 100/100, No. 2712, 2761, 2762, 2763.   3  
Carl von Clausewitz, On War, p. 228.   3  
Arie K. van der Vlies, 'AirLand Battle in NATO: A European View." Doctrinal Essays on AirLand Battle and Echelons Above Corps. An Anthology of Student Papers 1983-1984, U.S. Army War College, Carlisle Barracks, PA, p. 52.3
Trevor N. Dupuy, 'The Influence of Technology On War.'
7 Bernard Rogers, *NATO: The Next Decade." Journal of the Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies, December 1982, vol. 127, no.
4, pp. 3-6.   
0 FM 100-5, p. i. (On p. 2-3 the manual states that on strategic level not only forces, but also the threat of force can be used).4  1 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, p. 92.(On p. 82 Clausewitz talks about prepared forces, which are waiting for military action; but this is not meant in the sense of deterrence, rather waiting as reserve forces 'or a better moment to act; also see p. 386; Clausewitz talks about the enemy's fear of defeat; but that does not mean the form of deterrence we understand.) 4 2 1bid., p. 77, p. 472. (. . . make him . . . defenseless,m or ". . . disarm him . . . must always be the aim of warfare.") Arie K. van der Vlis, AirLand Battle in NATO: A European View, p.
WhitePaper 1983, No. 268, No. 306, No.  307.4 3 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, p. 471.   4 4  1bid., p. 237 (he means operations, which do not lead to enemy's forces destruction, but to a defense of a locality only).4 5    White Paper 1983, No. 254; see also No. 258 (There is no logistic system capable of supporting NATO's forces for an operation into enemy-'s territory).Hans-Henning von Sandrart, *Sandrart: Die NATO bleibt defensiv."4 6  Clausewitz-Gesellschaft (Hrsg.), Freihe-t ohne Krieo?
7 Samuel P. Huntington, "Conventional Deterrence and
--------------*
Ibid., p. 392; see also p. 363 (Howard/Paret use both
8 1bid., p. 10-3. For better identification, figures (91) to
2 Bobby J. Maddox, "Landpower's Third Dimension." Army, March
6 Donn A. Starry, "Extending the Battlefield.' Military Review, March 1981, p. 34.4 7 1bid., p. 34.
Ibid., No. 2712, 3002, 3310, 3311.   Often the term "i,obile defense" is used, which means in its effect the same; but "active defense" is preferred, because it suggests also a "mental" activity.6 31bid., No. 27036 31bid., No.  , 27046 31bid., No.  , 27556 31bid., No.  , 2757.  .   
1bid., pp. 348-349. (It is not clear, why Howard & Paret
6 1bid., p. 3-4, 11-2, 11-3.1 7 1bid., p. 11-3. General Starry, U.S. Army, says U.S. Forces
Jack A. LeCuyer, "Force Integration," Military Review, February 1984, p. 25. --2 The Federal Minister of Defense, Army Staff -I1 6. Army Requlation 100/100 (Restricted) (HDv 100/100 VS-NfD). Command and
4  Carl vonClausewitz, On War, p.  
351bid., p. 77.(The effort to overcome the enemy "can be expressed as the product of two inseparable factors, viz. the total means at his disposal and the strength of his will.")
" """
The fact that Clausewitz was an expert in politics, strategy, tactics, moral forces, etc. is what makes him so valuable and
Bernard Brodie, "The Continuing Relevance of On War," pp.
Army War College, 3 April 1982), p. 55. 
4
100-5, p. 2-3, 7-1, 7-4
Appendix B of FM 100-5 (issued 1982) lists nine principles of war. They "have essentially stood the tests of analysis, experimentation, and practice," as the introduction says. 
3 3
The nine principles and their imperative statements are as follows:
(1) OBJECTIVE. Direct every military operation towards a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective.
(2) OFFENSIVE. Secure, retain, and exploit the initiative.
(3) MASS. Concentrate combat power at the decisive place commanders could learn the proper method of judgement, which is the prerequisite for judging at all. 
5 6
57
Assuming that on the modern battlefield friction still exists as
Clausewitz saw it, it is important that operational manuals address b the significance of strong leaders, not only in stimulating the moral forces of the army, but also in making right and timely decisions through sound judgement. 
5 8
When FM 100-5 claims that "leadership is the crucial element   (The author received J. L. Romjue's publication upon completion of the thesis draft. An analysis showed, that the same basic publications, which were used by Romjue as significant sources, have already been used in this study, too).
-, 4 1 FM 100-5, p. 2-5.       