# ID: fe11f82c8b4f460aa87768999ad3c573
# Title: Interwar Period Officer Education: A Model For The Future
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2015.0
# Fulltext:
The interwar period (1919-1939) presented great economic, social, and political challenges to Germany and the United States. The interwar period challenged the United States Army with reductions in military strength and funding, public indifference, and an elevated level of anti-war sentiment. Germany faced similar social and economic conditions, exacerbated by the stiff limitations imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. These conditions did not relieve either nation of the responsibility to train and educate their military personnel-particularly the officers that would lead their militaries in a future conflict. Today the United States Army finds itself in a situation similar to the interwar period. The Army recently fought two protracted wars simultaneously and withdrawal from those conflicts will lead to reductions in military strength and funding, much like post-World War I reductions. Neither Germany nor the United States, however, made such significant reductions in their professional military education (PME) systems, enabling them to prepare for a future war far more effectively than they could have otherwise. The current PME, therefore, must focus on operational art, while continuing to provide an effective education that prepares its officers for future conflict in a complex and unpredictable operational environment.
The interwar period (1919-1939) presented great economic, social, and political challenges to both Germany and the United States. 
1
2
3
1
2
3 Peter J. Schifferle, America's School for War: Fort Leavenworth, Officer Education, and Victory in World War II (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 2010), 14-17.  underfunded the already small army each year making modernization impossible and training a challenge. 
4
5
In America's School for War: Fort Leavenworth, Officer Education, and Victory in World War II, Peter Schifferle examined how CGSS trained and educated officers to implement the lessons of World War I and prepare for "the inevitable War of the Future." 
6
Historians often claim that before and during World War II, the US Army had little understanding of operational art. 
7
8
9
While the US Army dealt with internally imposed difficulties, in contrast, Germany's military faced limitations the great powers imposed on the nation after the First World War.
Stiff limitations imposed by the Treaty of Versailles exacerbated Germany's volatile social and economic conditions. The Treaty reduced the German military in size, disposition, and capabilities, allowing it to conduct limited internal and national defense only. Article 176 of the treaty severely limited German professional military education. 
10
11
8
10
11 
Ibid. until 1935. 12
13
14
12
13
14
The current US Army's PME system employs various educational methods, including the study of past wars to improve preparation for various possible future contingencies requiring the use of military force. The Army's recent shift in educational emphasis towards unified land operations and the offense and defensive competencies of decisive action creates challenges as the Army emerges from thirteen years of immersion in conflicts that consisted primarily of counterinsurgency operations. 
15
This monograph explores the research question from a multiple case study approach, using cross-case analysis as a source of evidence to prove the validity of the thesis. The 15 For background on the US Army's recent shift in emphasis from counterinsurgency operations to unified land operations and the core competencies of decisive action see TRADOC Pamphlet 525-3-0; David Crozier, "Decisive Action: How to Fight and Sustain in the Army's Future Battles," NCO Journal, May 28, 2013, accessed January 21, 2015, http://ncojournal. dodlive.mil /2013/05/28/decisive-action-how-to-fight-and-sustain-in-the-armys-future-battles/.
previously identified research questions provide entry-level arguments that guide research and analysis. Comparison of American and German interwar military education systemsspecifically, the American Command and General Staff School and AWC, and the German Reichswehr and Kriegsakademie reveal similarities and differences in the two nations' approaches to officer education during the interwar period.
Two case studies-American operations in North Africa, and Operation Cobra, the American role in the major breakout effort that finally restored maneuver to the battlefield in Western Europe-demonstrate the manner in which the interwar education systems translated into performance on the battlefield. Three elements of operational art, center of gravity, phasing and transitions, and risk serve as the criteria to enable an objective comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of the American and the German Armies in combat, and provide a connection to the interwar education systems enabling identification of the key factors that differentiated the two armies' ability to conduct operational art. 
16
16
Operational requirements, limited funding, popular opinions about the military and war, as well as pre-war mobilization at the beginning of American involvement in World War I left officer professional military education in dire conditions. The operational requirements not only required many Regular Army and National Guard officers, it also drew a large number of its officers from the instructor positions that enabled the officer military education system to accomplish its mission. 17 Additionally, with American involvement in World War I on the horizon, the War Department slowed the function of CGSS and AWC from 1914-16 and then closed the schools in 1917 to support mobilization efforts. 
18
17
18 Timothy. K Nenninger, "A Brief Account of the Evolution of the Regular Course at the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College" (Special Collections, Ike Skelton Combined  Arms Library, 1988). Nenninger's analysis provides a streamlined guide on the evolution of the regular course from 1880-1988. In various time increments, Nenninger addressed the duration of the course, the curriculum focuses, class size and composition, as well as the outside influences and purposes for the numerous course changes. education found themselves initially assigned to the American Expeditionary Force (AEF) General Headquarters staff, leaving few to serve at the division level. 
19
20
21
22
The curriculum taught in the interwar period at CGSS and the AWC owed its origins to four significant review boards. The first of these boards, the AEF Superior Board on Organization and Tactics held in April 1919 synthesized the findings of smaller and more specialized boards. 
19
20
21
According to Michael Matheny, "the board confirmed the AEF's staff organization (and recommended its formation at the battalion level), unity of command, importance of logistics, supremacy of the infantry, and the offensive spirit." 
23
However, a significant level of disagreement existed amongst the board members, which manifested in their recommendations. The board consisted of divided groups made up of those who favored either the existing prewar doctrine, the employment of massive firepower as the primary means of conducting warfare, or the importance of firepower employed in a supporting role, while recognizing the infantry's continued place of primacy within the Army's combat formations. 
24
25
23
24
25
The McGlachlin board of 1922 sought a means to maintain a high quality officer education system while accounting for the manning and financial restrictions imposed by the National Defense Act of 1920. The board was chaired by a well-qualified officer. Before the mobilization for World War I, Major General Edward McGlachlin served as commandant of the Artillery School and during the war, he commanded the First US Army's artillery regiment. 
26
The board recommended changes to student selection and evaluations, training tour lengths, and the minimum service time between attendance to CGSS and AWC. According to historian Peter Schifferle, the board recommended that "the School of the Line be continued as a one-year program, followed by the General Staff School, with duration there limited to only six months." 
27
28
29
26
30
31
32
33
34
30 Ball,
Of Responsible Command,
Schifferle,
America's School for War,
34.
32 Ball,
Of Responsible Command,
210. 33
34
War. 35
These four boards' recommendations laid an institutional and doctrinal foundation for mid-grade officer education. This foundation, supported by the 1925 publication of Army Regulation 350-5 Training, solidified CGSS and the AWC as key institutions in the US Army's education system, giving them each a clear mission and focus until mobilization began in 1940. 
36
Although the duration of CGSS during the interwar period changed based on various War Department directed requirements, the curriculum remained consistent and grounded in the governing doctrine of the period. CGSS curriculum centered on command and general staff functions at the reinforced brigade, division, and corps echelons-the realm of tactics. During the years when it offered a second-year course, the General Staff School also taught operations at the field army level to those officers selected to attend. Regardless of the duration of the course, 
35
36
37
39
Curriculum focused on history, personnel, intelligence, operations and training, logistics, mobilization, campaign planning, and war plans, all at the theater strategic and operational 
37
38
39
40
41
42
Students at the AWC also served a functional purpose to the War Department. Along with the study of historical campaigns and operations, committees of students assisted the War Plans Department by reviewing actual war plans. Each class provided detailed input on the various war plans developed to deal with a "worst case" scenario against a range of possible enemies including Japan and even Great Britain. 
43
44
45
41
42
43
44
45
Department war plans, changing only in the scenarios it used in the curriculum as it reviewed war plans for dealing with threats from a wider array of possible enemies.
In 1934, the AWC built on the existing curriculum, to include developing plans for fighting conflicts in conjunction with Allies. 
46
47
48
49
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
54
55
Historians such as Jörg Muth, Martin Blumenson, and Charles J. Kirkpatrick argued that the concept of the school solution, and the rigid problem solving methodology imparted on 
51 Ball,
Of Responsible Command,
Petty,
"Training vs.
52 U.S. Army Command and General Staff School, Annual Report(s) of the Command  and General Staff School, 1919-1920 through 1939-1940 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Command and  General Staff School Press, 1920-1940); U.S. Army Command and General Staff School, Class  Schedules for 1917-1917 through 1939-1940 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Command and General  Staff School Press, 1920-1940). 
53
54
55
Eisenhower vary greatly. However, it is clear that they valued the knowledge and experience gained from CGSS and AWC when immersed in the planning and decision-making of World War II. 
58
59
56
Muth,
Command Culture,
58
62
63
64
65
66
64
65
66
67
compelled officers at all levels to develop intimate familiarity with the new tactical doctrine.
Unlike CGSS, the Reichswehr tested officer's knowledge in the aforementioned doctrine in the arduous Wehrkreis Prüfung (defense district exams). Recommendation letters, performance evaluations, and exam results provided an objective measure of each officer's qualifications to enter the General Staff Course. 
69
70
71
72
73
69
74
Unlike the second year of CGSS, which centered on corps level operations, the second year of the general staff course focused on tactical operations at the division level. Officers received twenty-four hours of instruction in subject matter similar to the first year course. 
75
76
77
In the third year of the course, officers found themselves assigned to Reichswehr units to conduct "troop duty." During this period, an officer served as a "trainee" on infantry and cavalry division staffs. 
78
74
75
76
77
78
Reichswehr in Berlin. However, advancement to the fourth year was not guaranteed and often did not happen. 
79
81
83
79
80
81
82 James A. Beaulieu, "The Education of Mid-Career Officers," 4-5; Citino, The Path to Blitzkrieg, 91-92. 
83
84
85
Academics in the General Staff Course, performance, experience, and the winter war games helped to identify the leaders within the Reichswehr and Wehrmacht that would develop future theater strategies. Additionally, it assisted in identifying the leaders that had the potential to command at the army and army group level. However, the overemphasis of tactics in these officers' education meant that they did not possess a sound grasp of national or theater strategy.
Once Adolf Hitler removed the officers who could have served as key strategic leaders on the general staff, but did not demonstrate sufficient loyalty to him, he created a shortage of officers with both a solid grasp of strategic issues and a willingness to advocate sound German strategy that differed from Hitler's views as the events of the 1930s unfolded. 
86
85
86
did not resist his delusion-driven operational goals. 
87
88
The Interwar Period presented tough challenges for the US Army and the German Reichswehr. Both armies mitigated the effects of limited military funding and the political, social, and economic turmoil of the period by preparing for the next war through professional officer education. Both nations' military educational systems revealed their awareness of the benefit that their officer corps gained from mastery of combined arms doctrine, joint and combined multinational operations, the importance of logistics, critical and creative thinking in problem solving, common and shared understanding of what became known as operational art, campaign planning, and strategy (to various degrees). Additionally, both nations' officer education at the field grade level stressed the importance of technological innovation in land, air, and naval power, although neither nation had the funding to develop these innovations in any significant way until the last several years of the interwar period.
CGSS created competent, professional, and dedicated officers at the tactical and operational levels, while the AWC did this at the operational and strategic levels. The CGSS curriculum emphasized coordination and cooperation between the branches of the Army, while the AWC focused on the same between the Army (including the Army Air Corps) and the Navy. 
89
90
89
90
91
Both nations ran selective and demanding military education programs. Due to the political, economic, and social conditions of the interwar period, academic performance carried weight when senior leaders made decisions regarding promotions and retention in both armies.
This emphasis placed on education as a means for promotion and retention created a sense of professionalism, competence, and dedication to duty in both armies, but this also created a problem for the Germans. 
92
93
94
The American and German emphasis on interwar period officer professional education clearly support Holder and Murray's assertion that, "investments in intellectual excellence can pay dividends in the next war." 
95
91
92
93
94
95
North Africa Campaign Background Before the execution of Operation Torch in November 1942, the Allied powers faced a grim strategic situation. 
96
97
98
96
98
The strategic situation for Germany by November 1942 was comparatively better than the Allies. 
99
108
109
110
112
107
108
113
The execution of the Allied landings and the follow-on operations to Tunis continued to test the strength of the interwar period officer education.
On November 8, 1942, the British and American Allies executed their first major operation of World War II. At the landing sites of all three task forces, the Allies experienced tactical delays. These resulted largely from Allies' limited experience in conducting airborne operations and major amphibious landings, and to a lesser degree, from patches of resistance by Vichy French forces. For example, at the Port of Fedala, allied ships were not configured effectively to support a timed, phased, and deliberate landing of combat power, and as such, operations were temporarily slowed.
114
116
Additionally, the rapid Axis response to Allied operations in North Africa did delay the Allied race to Tunis and allowed for the establishment of a strong defense in the port city before the Allies could mount a deliberate attack. However, the Axis forces' inability to exploit this success and maintain control of North Africa displays a lack of understanding of operational art. With the landings and lodgment consolidated, Operation Torch was complete and the transition to the North Africa campaign began.
From November 1942 through early January 1943, the British V Corps under Alexander and the US II Corps under Fredendall secured objectives that achieved limited operational success. 
117
118
117
118
119
122
119
120
121 Ibid.,
123
124
By contrast, the inability of Axis forces to even get along well enough to coordinate their operations highlights the weakness resulting from the independence and maverick behavior encouraged by their military traditions and education, distilled into the romanticized term Auftragstaktik. Upon Rommel's inability to translate his initial tactical success into a strategic victory, Eisenhower took the initiative to save the campaign. Eisenhower directed Fredendall to relieve Major General Orlando Ward and place Major General Ernest Harmon in command of First Armored Division in the capacity of deputy corps commander on February 22. 
125
126
123
124
125
126
128
127
128
129
German Army continued to achieve tactical successes, however because of their educational focus at the tactical level they were never able to translate them into operational strategic victories. Operation Torch represents the beginning of a downward trend that by Operation Cobra clearly displayed the strengths of US Army officer interwar education and the weaknesses of Germany's.
The Allies debated the timing of Operation Overlord, the Allied invasion of France, since America's entrance into World War II. 
130
130
131
132
133
134
Bradley. 135
136
137
138
139
140
The Cobra plan carried a high degree of risk. As noted by leaders within the Allied Expeditionary Air Forces, the proximity of the troops to the proposed target area and the corresponding flight paths of Allied aircraft presented the potential for large numbers of friendly air and ground casualties. 141 However, when Bradley left a July 19 planning conference with the Allied Air Forces in England, he was under the impression that the bombers would follow a flight 
138 Blumenson,
Breakout and Pursuit,
Prados,
Normandy Crucible,
4.
Blumenson,
Breakout and Pursuit,
141
142
Released on July 13, and further refined by Lieutenant General Collins before execution, the plan for Operation Cobra included considerations necessary for its coordination with Montgomery's own breakout effort, Operation Goodwood, which was the Allied main effort. 
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
150 Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit, 189-93;
Robert Neillands, The Battle of Normandy, 1944
(New York: Sterling Publishing, 2002)
151
153
Collins and Middleton advanced towards the Cotentin coast as combined arms fires from armor, artillery, and the air corps inflicted significant losses on the German forces. The Germans did, however, manage to conduct limited counterattacks that allowed a significant amount of German personnel and equipment to escape entrapment in Cotentin. 
158
August 19, 1944. 159
158
Light,
Blumenson,
Breakout and Pursuit,
Decision in Normandy,
160
161
Furthermore, this emergent strategy had linkages between the objectives at all levels of war and the operational commanders clearly understood them. Finally, closing the pocket would have led to dangerously thin American lines, and Bradley chose not to accept this risk. Only an overly critical view can explain the decades of criticism historians have aimed at the actions around the Falaise-Argentan Pocket, where the escape of some German forces amounted to a tactical disappointment at worst, and very insignificant when considered within the larger context of the highly successful Operation Cobra. This further supports the view that the training and education of the interwar period instituted an understanding of operational art, which in July, 1944 facilitated the success of Operation Cobra, as well as the transition to combined arms maneuver warfare, which was the basis of US Army doctrine throughout the interwar period. 
162
Operations in North Africa and the breakout during Operation Cobra presented officers of the American and German armies with tough challenges. Each campaign represented a complex 
160
161
These historical cases, evaluated using three elements of operational art (center of gravity, phasing and transitions, and risk) highlight key characteristics of interwar period officer education that contributed to each nation's understanding of operational art. 
163
164
164 George Forty, The Desert War, 149-50.  understanding of the linkage between tactical actions and strategic objectives within the unifying structure of an integrated and well-supported campaign. 
165
166
167
The North Africa campaign not only provided these personnel with tactical experience against Germany, it also gave the graduates of CGSS and the AWC an opportunity to test their interwar education at all levels and continue to learn, while facing the Germans in combat for the first time in the Second World War, and winning. Furthermore, the experience gained by American officers, when coupled with the battle hardening of the American combat solider, helped the US Army develop into a tough opponent for the Germans as the war progressed.
The German strategic objectives in response to Allied operations in North Africa consisted of two parts. The first involved maintaining Axis control of North Africa in an effort to 
165
166
167
168
169
At the beginning of Operation Torch, Rommel and his Afrika Korps were decisively engaged and retreating from Montgomery and the British 8th Army from Egypt into Tunisia.
Upon with the defeat and capitulation of the Vichy French in the west, the newly arrived Allied force in Tunisia resulted in pressure on the Axis forces in North Africa from two directions.
Rommel could do nothing more than conduct limited tactical actions in an effort to gain time for the reinforcements that Hitler committed to sending him, but by failing to coordinate these tactical actions with other Axis forces he undercut his own chances of achieving operational level success.
Rommel's limited offensive against the Americans at Faïd Pass and Sidi Bou Zid in February 1943 led to a tactical victory and gave Rommel hope for continued success and the possibility of a deep penetration. However, Rommel failed to understand the lack of logistic supportability of his plan, given the condition of his forces and lack of coordination with reinforcements that could have prevented his culmination after his defeat at Kasserine Pass. Therefore, Rommel could not exploit his initial successes and significantly threaten the American base of operation and lines of communication. Throughout the North Africa campaign, Rommel displayed a limited understanding of the risks he faced, and he passed up opportunities to mitigate them. He relied upon the element of surprise and overwhelming firepower to achieve tactical victories during the brief period that the American forces offered an easy target. These victories were not in support of, or linked to a larger strategic objective. Commando Supremo (an Italian-led Axis headquarters) had operational control of Rommel and the Afrika Korps, but Rommel disregarded their directives and carried out his own operations, neglecting even to inform his higher headquarters of his plans. 
171
Operation Cobra represents another complex situation where reliance on interwar education assisted in the development of a plan that saved the larger Normandy campaign and perhaps the war. The two principal architects of Operation Cobra, Bradley and Collins, understood that in order to enable the breakout from the Normandy bocage, the Allies had to defeat the German operational center of gravity. Therefore, they focused the planning and execution of Operation Cobra on the defeat of the German panzer divisions on the Normandy 
171 Megargee,
Inside Hitler's High Command,
97,
173
The Allies acknowledged the risk that Operation Cobra presented. As in the case of Operation Torch, Bradley and Collins sought to mitigate risk with overwhelming fire support, air superiority, concentration of combat power, and the speed of maneuver warfare. Despite the catastrophe of the Allied preparatory bombing, the flexibility of the Cobra plan allowed for commanders such as Collins and Middleton to make decisions that prevented tactical and operational risks from inhibiting the pursuit and achievement of the strategic objectives.
Operation Cobra achieved its operational strategic objectives, despite the escape of a significant number of German forces from the Argentan-Falaise pocket (offset by the destruction of an equally significant number of enemy units). Additionally, Operation Cobra showed that when coupled with experience, the education of US Army officers during the interwar period proved invaluable in enabling success in warfare.
Until the execution of Cobra, the Germans considered the allied center of gravity to be the British forces in and around Caen. The constant fear of a subsequent allied landing at Pas de Calais and the vulnerability of an ensuing allied attack across the Rhine into Ruhr industrial base of Germany fueled this conviction. Therefore, the German operational plan centered on the redistribution of German forces from the south in an effort to reinforce Caen and defeat the British. In support of this, the German forces in the south focused on the attrition and fixing of the Americans in the bocage around St. Lo. While the plan seemed feasible, a lack of understanding of the strategic and operational situation, coupled with the continued success of Allied deception operations that left the Germans convinced that a second amphibious assault at the Pas de Calais could happen any time, seriously constrained German action against the Americans when the success of Operation Cobra shifted the Allied operational center of gravity. Additionally, the severely disrupted German lines of communication forced the Germans to accept operational risk in dividing their forces and leaving themselves vulnerable to an American offensive in the south.
The movement of troops to Caen and the corresponding risk surfaced upon the execution of Cobra. Fixed by the British attack during Operation Goodwood and hindered by strained lines of communication, the Germans could execute only a limited response to Cobra, delaying but not preventing the inevitable German retreat. The Germans did conduct a counteroffensive near Mortain from August 7 to 13, but it failed to achieve its objectives of advancing to Avranches and cutting off the American forces that had advanced into Brittany. This failed counteroffensive forced the Germans to spend the remaining days of Cobra in delaying the allied closure of the Argentan-Falaise pocket to allow for the escape of as much combat power as possible.
The German response to Cobra demonstrated a lack of understanding of both theater strategy and operational art. It displayed no clear "pursuit of strategic objectives…through the arrangement of tactical actions in time space and purpose." 174 Neither did the Germans display an understanding of the relative importance of tactical actions, like the fact that they could not expect to win a campaign or a war through victories at the tactical level alone. The success of the Americans and the failure of the Germans in World War II rested on many strategic, operational, and tactical factors. However, the base of both nations' successes and failures rested on the shoulders of interwar officer education.
174 ADRP 3-0, 4-1.
The Interwar-Period (1919-1939) presented great social, political, and economic changes to the people of the United States and Germany. The armies of both the United States and Germany suffered massive losses in funding, manning, and general popular support. This led both nations to rely on officer education as a means to counter these limitations, implement the lessons from World War I, and prepare their officer corps for the war that loomed on the horizon. Each nation took similar, yet different approaches to the programs they developed to do this.
The United States in a building-block approach relied on CGSS and AWC to create a mid-grade and senior officer corps that understood the function of the general staff, the three levels of war, and the ways to integrate them in support of overarching political objectives.
Germany took a similar approach. The German program created an officer corps that understood the general staff and the three levels of war, but lacked formal education in the synchronization and integration of the military objectives in support of political objectives. In light of this, operations in North Africa and Western Europe validated the interwar officer education of the US Army while revealing the weaknesses of Germany's, providing valuable lessons for the future of officer PME.
Operation Torch provides the initial set of implications to officer education. The American planning and execution of Operation Torch demonstrated the importance of synchronized political goals with military objectives, as well as the importance of a coordinated joint and combined staff organization. 
175
The American success and the German failure in World War II illustrates the relative importance of a curriculum that stresses instruction in operational art. The current Command and General Staff College curriculum provides instruction in operational art, presented, however, in a very broad and basic context. Therefore, field grade officer PME should expand in scope to allow for more formalized instruction that enables a deep theoretical and practical understanding of operational art. This will not only assist in strategic and operational planning across the army, but in the creation of adaptive and imaginative staff officers and future commanders.
A direct corollary exists between the American and German officer education programs of the interwar period. While the Germans had a more stringent selection and admission process than the Americans, both nations enforced tough academic standards on their students. Officers in recent years have tended to take the course less seriously in comparison to those of the interwar period. This leads to the second recommendation: reinstitution of the strict academic standards that governed interwar period officer education. This would not only increase the quality of the graduates, but also reinvigorate the significance of education within the US Army's organizational culture-significance that has arguably declined in recent years. Historian George Santayana wrote, "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."
176
The current United States Army's PME system includes the study of past wars to improve future preparation for various possible future contingencies requiring the use of military force. However, the bulk of the instruction covers European military history, specifically that of Prussia and Germany. American military history might not offer an image of immense professionalism and panache like that seen in the tradition of centuries-old fighting cultures. However, American military history does depict a pragmatic use of operational art that befits both the nation's and the Army's culture and fighting style. One can see this in the American planning and execution of Operations Torch and Cobra. Therefore, the third and final recommendation for the future of officer PME rests on the premise of an increased emphasis in the study of American military history. Doing this enables students to achieve a greater appreciation and pride for the history of their nation and chosen profession, while developing a greater understanding of American operational art.
Field grade officer PME in the US Army is as important today as it was during the interwar period. The contemporary operational environment requires a field grade officer that is flexible, adaptive and can think critically and creatively amidst the complex problems the US Army currently faces. This requires a theoretical and doctrinal expertise in the application of operational art. Therefore, as the American and German PME shifted during the interwar period (1919-1939) to account for the changes in warfare, contemporary field grade officer PME must shift to curriculum that is more centric on operational art in order to enable the success of the US Army in future conflict.
73  
73  
110 112 Rick Atkinson, An Army at Dawn, 79-91; Matheny, Carrying the War to the Enemy, 171-72.
Ibid., 13.   
Ball, Of Responsible Command, Schifferle, America's School for War, 34.   
Ibid., 37-38; F.W. Wilburn, trans., Truppenführung, Part I (Special Collections, Ike  Skelton Combined Arms Library, 1933).
Megargee, Inside Hitler's High Command,[61][62][63][64][65][66] Weinberg, Germany, Hitler & World  War II, 
Megargee, Inside Hitler's High Command,[61][62][63][64][65][66] Weinberg, Germany, Hitler & World  War II, 
Karl Hoffman, Commanders in Focus: Erwin Rommel (London: Brassey's Publishing,  2004), 10-16; David Fraser, Knight's Cross: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel (New York:  Harper Collins Publishers, 1995), 85-98.    
Fraser, Knight's Cross,[85][86][87][88][89][90][91][92][93][94][95][96][97][98] 
Howe, Northwest Africa: Seizing the Initiative in the West, 16-31; Matheny, Carrying the War to the Enemy, 171.
Howe, Northwest Africa: Seizing the Initiative in the West, 139-41.
Ibid., 
Martin Blumenson, European Theater of Operations: Breakout and Pursuit, United States Army in World War II, ed. Kent R. Greenfield (Washington, DC: Office of the Chief of Military History, 1961), 3-4, 185; John Prados, Normandy Crucible: The Decisive Battle that Shaped World War II and Europe (New York: New American Library, 2011), 2-3.
Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit, 189.  Operation Cobra, although amended to be executed on July 21, 1944, actually began on July 25, 1944 after the aborted attempt on July 24.
Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit, 228-29; Carlo D'Este, Decision in Normandy, 2nd  ed. (New York: Harper Perennial Publishing, 1991), 400-03.
Doubler, Closing with the Enemy,[79][80][81] D'Este, Decision in Normandy,  Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit, 
Atkinson, The Guns at Last Light, Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit, 246.    
Atkinson, The Guns at Last Light, 
Carafano, 265.   
William R. Betson, "Centers of Gravity, Lines of Operations, and the Normandy Campaign," 15.
Matheny, Carrying the War to the Enemy, 184.
George Santayana, The Life of Reason: The Phases of Human Progress (New York: Charles Scribners Sons, 1905), 284.
I would like to express my gratitude to my director, 
Dr. Mark Calhoun
Colonel Michael Rayburn
Majors Brett Bardo
Todd Poindexter
Bailey. She
-SWD-GD Fort Leavenworth
KS 66027-2301 8. PERFORMING ORG REPORT NUMBER 9
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) Advanced Operational Arts Studies Fellowship
Advanced Military Studies Program 10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 12. DISTRIBUTION / AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for Public Release
Jason S. Jones
AWC Army War College CGSS Command and General Staff School PME Professional Military Education SHAEF Supreme
In August 1942, Eisenhower received his strategic guidance for operations in North Africa from General Marshall. 
102
103
104
105
106
102
103
Therefore, Operation Torch and the campaign in Tunisia indicate that officer education must have an aspect of doctrinal and tactical mastery, strong logistical understanding, an emphasis on the intricacies of the three levels of war, and an understanding of joint and multinational operations.
These educational outcomes must all coexist within an overarching understanding and instruction of operational art.
While Operation Torch provided the initial set of implications to officer education, Operation Cobra campaign reinforced them. The American planning and execution of Cobra, as well as the German response reconfirms the relative importance of tactical and doctrinal mastery in warfare. However, the actions of the Americans and Germans from Overlord through Cobra once again demonstrated that victory in war does not take place because of tactical expertise alone, but through an understanding and application of operational art. Additionally, Bradley's and Collins' efforts to understand their current situation, the allied desired end state, and the problems they faced in developing the operational approach implies the importance of design in the execution of operational art. Therefore, future mid-grade officer education must emphasize the incorporation of tactical and doctrinal proficiency in support of the application of operational art, complemented by the recent concept of operational design.
The Army's recent shift in educational emphasis towards the offense and defensive competencies of decisive action creates challenges as the Army emerges from thirteen years of immersion in conflicts that emphasized counterinsurgency operations. Just as in the Interwar Period, the contemporary field grade officer PME, therefore, must shift in focus while continuing