# ID: fe4a8bd7e75742d4be8a29d2ee9e4792
# Title: bringing the box into doctrine: Joint doctrine and the kill box
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2004.0
# Fulltext:
Since the dawn of modern warfare, commanders have sought ways to maximize the combined effects of maneuver and firepower. In the early years of mechanization and aircraft, the struggle to define the roles of these new weapon systems prevented anything more than ad hoc attempts to synchronize their effects. It would take a tragedy during the Normandy campaign of the Second World War to motivate the Army and its post-war counterpart, the Air Force, to formalize air-ground coordination procedures. Describing these procedures is now the responsibility of joint and service doctrine, but on the topic of commanding, controlling, and synchronizing operational fires, both remain deficient. Most notably, the inability of doctrine to provide clarity and a common philosophy concerning the fire support coordination line has led to confusion and allowed a debate over the purpose and placement of this fire support coordinating measure to detract from joint interoperability. To compensate for this shortcoming, some components of the joint force have developed the kill box to supplement or potentially replace the fire support coordination line. This paper seeks to evaluate the kill box, determine its utility as a joint coordination measure, and make a recommendation on its role in joint doctrine.
Describing these procedures is now the responsibility of joint and service doctrine, but on the topic of commanding, controlling, and synchronizing operational fires, both remain deficient. Most notably, the inability of doctrine to provide clarity and a common philosophy concerning the fire support coordination line has led to confusion and allowed a debate over the purpose and placement of this key fire support coordinating measure to detract from joint interoperability. To compensate for this shortcoming, some components of the joint force have developed the kill box to supplement or potentially replace the fire support coordination line. This paper seeks to evaluate the kill box, determine its utility as a joint fire support coordination measure, and make a recommendation on its role in joint doctrine.
Air Interdiction -air operations conducted to destroy, neutralize, or delay the enemy's military potential before it can be brought to bear against friendly forces at such distance from friendly forces that detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of friendly forces is not required. (JP 1-02) AOC Air Operations Center -the principal air operations installation from which aircraft and air warning functions of combat air operations receive direction, control, and execution guidance. It is the senior agency of the Air Force Component Commander from which command and control of air operations are coordinated with other components and Services. (JP 1-02) ASOC Air Support Operations Center -agency of the tactical air-ground system collocated with a corps or appropriate land force headquarters; coordinates and directs close air support and other tactical air support. (JP 1-02) ATACMS Army Tactical Missile System -a guided missile launched from a Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) with a standard range of approximately 160 kilometers. Block IA missiles increase this range to approximately 300 kilometers.
Order -A method used to task and disseminate to components, subordinate units, and command and control agencies projected sorties, capabilities and/or forces to targets and specific missions. Normally provides specific instructions to include call signs, targets, controlling agencies, etc., as well as general instructions. Also an Integrated Tasking Order (ITO). (JP 1-02) BAI Battlefield Air Interdiction -AI attacks conducted against hostile land forces that are not in close proximity to friendly forces are referred to as battlefield air interdiction if the hostile forces could have a near-term effect on the operation or scheme of maneuver of friendly forces. No longer found in joint doctrine, but still defined in some older Army publications. (FM 6-20-30)   BCD Battlefield Coordination Detachment -An Army liaison provided by the Army component or force commander to the air operations center (AOC) and/or to the component designated by the joint force commander to plan, coordinate, and deconflict air operations. The battlefield coordination detachment processes Army requests for air support, monitors and interprets the land battle situation for the AOC, and provides the necessary interface for exchange of current intelligence and operational data. (JP 1-02) BCL Battlefield Coordination Line -a non-doctrinal United States Marine Corps measure that delineates battlefield responsibilities between the Marine division and the Marine Expeditionary Force (MEF); placed between the division forward boundary and the JFC-established fire support coordination line, during Operation IRAQI FREEDOM, the BCL was the point at which control of kill boxes within the MEF sector passed from the MEF to the C/JFACC.
Close Air Support -air action by fixed-and rotary-wing aircraft against hostile targets that are in close proximity to friendly forces and that require detailed integration of each air mission with the fire and movement of those forces.
United States Central Command -a combatant command headquartered in Tampa, Florida and responsible for planning and executing military operations in support of the national security strategy in Central and Southwest Asia and parts of east Africa.
Combined Forces Command (Korea) -a combined American-South Korean command headquartered in Yongsan, South Korea and responsible for the planning and executing the defense of the Republic of Korea.
Reference System -provides a universal, joint perspective with which to define specific areas of the battlespace, enabling the JFC and component commanders to efficiently coordinate, deconflict, and synchronize surface TCT (time critical target) attacks. (FM 90-36)   EUCOM United States European Command -a combatant command headquartered in Heidelberg, Germany and responsible for planning and executing military operations in support of the national security strategy in Europe, Russia, Israel, and the majority of Africa.
viii FLOT Forward Line of Troops -a line that indicates the most forward positions of friendly forces in any kind of military operation at a specific time. (JP 1-02) FSCL Fire Support Coordination Line -A fire support coordinating measure that is established and adjusted by appropriate land or amphibious force commanders within their boundaries in consultation with superior, subordinate, supporting, and affected commanders. Fire support coordination lines (FSCL) facilitate the expeditious attack of surface targets of opportunity beyond the coordinating measure. An FSCL does not divide an area of operations by defining a boundary between close and deep operations or a zone for close air support. The FSCL applies to all fires of air, land, and sea-based weapons systems using any type of ammunition. Forces attacking targets beyond an FSCL must inform all affected commanders in sufficient time to allow necessary reaction to avoid fratricide. Supporting elements attacking targets beyond the FSCL must ensure that the attack will not produce adverse attacks on, or to the rear of, the line. Short of an FSCL, all air-to-ground and surface-to-surface attack operations are controlled by the appropriate land or amphibious force commander. The FSCL should follow well-defined terrain features. Coordination of attacks beyond the FSCL is especially critical to commanders of air, land, and special operations forces. In exceptional circumstances, the inability to conduct this coordination will not preclude the attack of targets beyond the FSCL. However, failure to do so may increase the risk of fratricide and could waste limited resources. (JP 1-02) FSCM Fire Support Coordinating (or Coordination or Control) Measure -a measure employed by land or amphibious commanders to facilitate the rapid engagement of targets and simultaneously provide safeguards for friendly forces. (JP 1-02) JFC Joint Forces Commander -a general term applied to a combatant commander, sub-unified commander, or joint task force commander authorized to exercise combatant command (command authority) or operational control over a joint force. (JP 1-02) JFACC Joint Forces Air Component Commander -commander within a unified command, subordinate unified command, or joint task force responsible to the establishing commander for making recommendations on the proper employment of assigned, attached, and/or made available for tasking air forces; planning and coordinating air operations; or accomplishing such operational missions as assigned. (JP 1-02) JFLCC Joint Forces Land Component Commander -the commander within a unified command, subordinate unified command, or joint task force responsible to the establishing commander for making recommendations on the proper employment of assigned, attached, and/or made available for tasking land forces; planning and coordinating land operations; or accomplishing such operational missions as may be assigned. (JP 1-02) JOA Joint Operations Area -an area of land, sea, and airspace, defined by a geographic combatant commander or subordinate unified commander, in which a joint force commander (normally a joint task force commander) conducts military operations to accomplish a specific mission.
ix JSOA Joint Special Operations Area -a restricted area of land, sea, and airspace assigned by a joint force commander to the commander of a joint special operations force to conduct special operations activities. (JP 1-02) JTF Joint Task Force -a joint force that is constituted and so designated by the Secretary of Defense, a combatant commander, a sub-unified commander, or an existing joint task force commander.   
Doctrine "provides a military organization with a common philosophy, a common language, a common purpose, and unity of effort." General George H. Decker 2
The purpose of joint military doctrine, according to the Joint Doctrine Capstone and Keystone Primer is to provide essential principles that guide the employment of military forces.
As such, it provides authoritative direction built upon time-tested principles and contemporary lessons to ensure the exploitation of friendly advantages against threat vulnerabilities. In other words, joint doctrine defines the way the "Armed Forces think about the use of the military instrument of national power" by describing methodologies that synchronize the capabilities of the joint force to decisively defeat its enemies. 
3
This process can count amongst its successes the victories of Operations DESERT STORM, ENDURING FREEDOM, and IRAQI FREEDOM, but not without recognizing where it has fallen short. One of these shortcomings has directly contributed to the topic of this paper.
Since before the end of combat operations during DESERT STORM, ground and airpower 2 MAJ Robert F. Barry, "'Who's Zooming Who?' Joint Doctrine and the Army -Air Force Debate over the FSCL" (Master of Military Arts and Science, Command and General Staff College, 1994), 3.
3 United States Department of Defense. Joint Doctrine Capstone and Keystone Primer (Washington, D.C.: Joint Staff, September 10, 2001), 2.  proponents have conducted a debate over the most efficient and effective application of operational fires on the battlefield. Though the debate is about the division of the joint operations area and the most efficient means to engage targets, it manifests itself in a doctrinal discussion over the purpose and placement of a graphic control measure -the fire support coordination line. 
4
Proposed measures included: the Deep Battle Synchronization Line, Long Range Interdiction Line, Air-Ground Coordination Line, Battlefield Coordination Line (BCL), the Operational Interdiction Line (in conjunction with boundaries), and the kill box. Of these, only the kill box and the BCL, used by the Marine Corps in IRAQI FREEDOM, have achieved any success.
However, the BCL, like most of the other proposals, is a single service solution unaccepted by, perhaps even inapplicable to, the entire joint force. Only the kill box, the focus of this paper, has enjoyed widespread acceptance across the joint force and been tested in combat. This paper asks:
Is it time to standardize this technique and incorporate it into joint doctrine? 5 4 The FSCL, which first appeared in Army doctrine in 1961, is the last in a series of coordination and anti-fratricide measures developed by the Army and Air Force to prevent the reoccurrence of the tragedies similar to that which struck the 30 th Infantry Division in July 1944. On two consecutive days, medium and heavy bombers, lacking sufficient formalized coordination and deconfliction procedures, inadvertently struck the 30 th Division and its adjacent units causing the death of over 130 soldiers (including that of Lieutenant General Leslie McNair, Chief of Army Ground Forces). Though an isolated incident, this tragedy triggered the post-war Army and Air Force to formalize inter-service coordination and deconfliction procedures. A historical study of the FSCL and those measures that preceded it is beyond the scope of this paper, but the reader can find this information using the sources listed in the Bibliography. 
5 Barry,
[30]
[31]
Before answering this question, there are several reasons to review the ongoing doctrinal debate over the purpose and placement of the FSCL. First, the purpose of this paper is to evaluate the kill box, which, in its current form, evolved to help mitigate the shortcomings, real and perceived, of the FSCL. Practice, if not doctrine, ties the FSCL and the kill box together; the future of one could have a significant impact on the future of the other. Secondly, the FSCL provides a compelling example of the confusion that can result when the joint force lacks a common understanding of its doctrine. The inability to create a common doctrinal understanding poses challenges for a joint force that must train, deploy, and employ its forces anywhere in the world on a moment's notice. Is it not likely that unfamiliarity, caused by confusing doctrine or a lack of procedural standardization, only complicates the integration of joint forces and the creation of the synergistic effect of unified action? Anecdotal evidence from Operation IRAQI FREEDOM suggests this is so. 
6
6 Based on several comments from the 3d Infantry Division (Mechanized) after action review. Many of the Division's issues with V (US) Corps appear related to Corps-specific standard operating procedures containing doctrinal interpretations , terms, and procedures unfamiliar to the Division. It seems possible that some of these issues would have been absent if the Division had fought with the headquarters it trains with, XVIII (US) Airborne Corps. This will become more obvious in Chapter Two, Central Command and Summary. For a similar argument at a different staff level, see LTC Thomas L. Kelly and LTC (Ret) John P. Andreason, "Joint Fires: A BCD Perspective in Operation Iraqi Freedom," Field Artillery Journal VIII, no. 6 (November-December 2003): 25. confusion and frustration complicates unity of effort and mission accomplishment. Consider the three inconsistencies found in these definitions.
First, joint and service definitions neither clearly describe the FSCL nor uniformly explain its purpose. Is it a permissive control measure that requires notification, as the Army suggests, or is it a restrictive control measure that requires coordination, as the Air Force suggests? The joint definition answers the question one way, yet in reality, the joint force operates in the other. Not one of mere semantics, the answer to this question is one of purpose and implementation. Should the FSCL force the land component to coordinate actions within its own area of operations? While a soldier might answer in the negative, an airman required to operate forward of the FSCL would probably answer in the affirmative.
Second, joint and service definitions variously describe the FSCL as a tool to coordinate fires, expedite attack, and protect the friendly force (air assets beyond it and ground forces short of it). Can it do all three equally well? It probably cannot. At first glance, one might assume, by reading Joint Publication 3-09, Joint Fire Support, and Field Manual 101-5-1, Operational Terms and Graphics, that force protection is the primary purpose. If so, the FSCL will likely remain what it was at its origin -an anti-fratricide tool that accomplishes its mission of protecting air and ground forces by separating the joint components of operational fires on the battlefield. At the very least, this interpretation will virtually ensure continued tension over its placement.
Finally, poorly worded or incomplete definitions have also led to confusion over FSCL placement. According to JP 3-0, Doctrine for Joint Operations, the FSCL should not "unduly inhibit operational tempo while maximizing the effectiveness of organic and joint force interdiction assets." It continues by stating that establishing the FSCL "too far forward of friendly forces can limit the responsiveness of air interdiction sorties and could unduly hinder expeditious attack of adversary forces." The vagueness of these two brief phrases forms the centerpiece of the debate between air and ground forces. How can its placement inhibit tempo and what is "too far forward?" Joint doctrine fails to adequately address either of these questions and there is little inter-service agreement on possible solutions. 
7
7
8 Lt Col R. Kent Laughbaum, "Synchronizing Airpower and Firepower in the Deep Battle" (Air University, January 1999), 48. According to this source, Third Army planned to place the FSCL 80-100 kilometers forward of its front line of troops in normal operations and as much as 150 kilometers forward during rotary wing operations in future conflict. This occurred during OIF. As for the ATO, the author has heard many Army officers express doubt in or ignorance of the process. Lieutenant General William S. Wallace, Commander, U.S. Army Combined Arms Center and former Commander, V (US) Corps in OIF, agrees. In a published interview, LTG Wallace, who has "no problem with the ASR [air support request] cycle or the ATO cycle," stated: "…Army guys don't understand it [the ATO]. They think … that the cycle is rigid." See Patrecia S. Hollis, "Trained, Adaptable, Flexible Forces = Victory in Iraq," Field Artillery Journal VIII, no. 5 (September-October 2003): 10-11.
Alternatively, but at much greater risk, does he allow his ground force to cross the FSCL? It is a decision no commander should have to make. 
9
10
10 Counterland, 61. The range of the Multiple Launch Rockets System is 32 kilometers for standard range rockets, 45 kilometers for extended range rockets, and 160+ kilometers for ATACMS. The Apache is capable of conducting deep attacks as far as 200 kilometers into enemy-occupied territory.
11 Ibid.; and see Leaf, 22. In fact, with the FSCL well forward of most ground forces, the placement "issue" is transparent to most soldiers on the ground. Those most concerned with its placement are generally located at division and higher staff elements and artillery units not found near the FSCL. The
So, what does doctrine say? According to the Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02, the FSCL is: … established and adjusted by appropriate land or amphibious force commanders … in consultation with superior, subordinate, supporting, and affected commanders ... [to]  facilitate the expeditious attack of surface targets of opportunity beyond the coordinating measure. An FSCL does not divide an area of operations by defining a boundary between close and deep operations or a zone for close air support …applies to all fires of air, land, and sea-based weapons systems using any type of ammunition. Forces attacking targets beyond an FSCL must inform all affected commanders … to allow necessary reaction to avoid fratricide. Supporting elements attacking targets beyond the FSCL must ensure that the attack will not produce adverse attacks on, or to the rear of, the line. Short of an FSCL, all air-to-ground and surface-to surface attack operations are controlled by the appropriate land or amphibious force commander. The FSCL should follow well-defined terrain features. Coordination of attacks beyond the FSCL is especially critical to commanders of air, land, and special operations forces. In exceptional circumstances, the inability to conduct this coordination will not preclude the attack of targets beyond the FSCL. However, failure to do so may increase the risk of fratricide and could waste limited resources. 12 However, joint doctrine begins to lose clarity when one looks beyond the Dictionary. JP 3-03, Joint Interdiction, and JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support, only suggest that these attacks "should be coordinated with the affected [land or naval] commanders," but recognize that "exceptional circumstances" may require deviations from this standard. More than just a difference of semantics, this phrase is very different from the requirement to prevent the effects of an attack "on, or to the rear of, the [fire support coordination] line" unless these attacks are under the control of the appropriate land or amphibious force commander. 
13
However, in defining permissive control measures, it qualifies the FSCL as unique and unlike those permissive measures that require no detailed coordination before the engagement of targets. few ground elements located at FSCL-depth on the battlefield, predominately special operations forces, are generally well equipped with global positioning devices that decrease their reliance on terrain orientation.
12 United States Department of Defense. JP 1-02, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (Washington, D.C.: Joint Staff, September 25, 2002), 197. Author added emphasis. The joint force adopted this version of the FSCL definition in the 1993 version of JP-3-09, Joint Fire Support.
13 United States Department of Defense. JP 3-03, Doctrine for Joint Interdiction Operations (Washington, D.C.: Joint Staff, April 10, 1997), II-14; and Department of Defense Dictionary of Military  and Associated Terms, 197. Author added emphasis.
Because the FSCL requires coordination between the land component and attacking air assets short of the FSCL and attempts by the land component to inform affected commanders (usually the air component) of attacks long of the FSCL, it is more like those measures defined as restrictive. These measures, like the FSCL, require pre-engagement coordination between the owner of the weapon system and the owner of the control measure. 
14
15
The first, an out-dated and incomplete version of the joint definition, does not place any requirement on forces conducting surface-to-surface attacks beyond the FSCL. In other words, it requires neither coordination with nor notification to affected commanders. The second, an Army definition, contains the "inform" requirement found in current joint definitions. FM 1-02, 14 Doctrine for Joint Fire Support, III-13. 
15
Operational Terms, which will supersede Operational Terms and Graphics when released for publication, contains a definition identical to that found in the Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. 
16
In another departure from joint doctrine, Air Force doctrine implies boundary-like qualities to FSCL. In fact, Counterland states: "the FSCL is often used as the forward limit of airspace controlled by the theater air-ground system." Though not restricting close air support (CAS) and air interdiction (AI) to opposite sides of the FSCL, this division, if used, would partition responsibilities between the Air Support Operations Center short of the FSCL and the Joint Air Operations Center beyond it. 18
Since DESERT STORM, the joint force has struggled, within the confines of poorly worded and inconsistent doctrinal definitions, to develop a common language and purpose governing the command and control of operational fires and effects. Unable to resolve this  2002). Somewhat out of place and contrary to other Army publications, this manual implies the FSCL has "boundary-like" qualities when it tells the reader to: "See also [the definition of] boundary …" 
17 Counterland, 59;
and
Air Force Glossary, (Headquarters, United States Air Force Doctrine Center, 2004, accessed January 27, 2004)
18
The term kill box is not new. In fact, though then performing a different task, kill boxes have been in the joint toolkit in one form or another since 1991. During Operation DESERT STORM, the JFACC established 30' by 30' boxes in which scout-killer teams roamed in search of specific target sets, usually Iraqi Republican Guard formations or mobile SCUD missile launchers. One account says this technique "doubled the F-16 BDA [battle damage assessment]," but at this stage, the JFC used the kill box exclusively to orient air assets beyond the FSCL. 
21
In fact, European Command has adopted the ALSA CGRS construct virtually without modification. Though Targeting was also the first joint or service manual to introduce the term kill box, it did so in the DESERT STORM, not contemporary, context. 
22
Targeting describes the former as a battlefield visualization framework, while the joint force 21 Lt Col William F. Andrews, "Airpower against an Army: Challenge and Response in CENTAF's Duel with the Republican Guard" (Air University, February 1998), 52-53. 
22
recognizes the latter as a coordination or synchronization technique. As used today, the kill box is a client of a common grid reference system, not a reference system itself. For instance, Combined Forces Command (Korea) defines the kill box as a CGRS targeting grid activated to achieve a specific purpose. In other words, the kill box comes into being after the CGRS. 
23
Amongst the characteristics of the Combined Forces Command (Korea), most notable is the fact that this command is multinational in practice, not in theory. Unlike other commands, CFC is a fully multinational headquarters; it is not an American headquarters functioning in a multinational environment. In times of peace and war, CFC represents the combined military forces of the United States, the Republic of Korea; in times of war, it includes the United Nations.
In the development of techniques and procedures, CFC must place multinational considerations (language, battle command technology, operational proficiency) at the forefront of the discussion 
23
Though Joint/Combined Fires accepts the joint definition of the FSCL, it "amplifies, for theater use, the doctrinal definition." Most notably, the publication defines a standard for FSCL placement in both the offense and defense, 25-40 kilometers and 15-25 kilometers from the forward line of troops respectively. It continues by stating that the FSCL generally follows terrain, but may follow along the corners of the Korean Common Grid Reference System (CGRS). Regardless of the method used, "friendly artillery (cannon) must range from the FLOT [forward line of own troops] to the FSCL (this to deny enemy sanctuary)." A key element, missing from the joint definition, resides in this publication. 
26
1
26 Author added emphasis. One could debate the specified distance, cannon artillery range, but the Command has identified a specific standard that all parties can recognize. In addition, with the kill box in use, the Command expects the "leading edge" of green kill boxes to define the placement of the FSCL and CFC 3-1 unambiguously makes the kill box the predominant coordinating measure. For example, a green kill box beyond the FSCL effectively moves the FSCL forward and a blue kill box short of the FSCL moves that portion of the FSCL closer to the FLOT.
According to CFC procedures, targeting grids or subsections become kill boxes when activated for use as a FSCM and airspace control measures. As FSCM, they are useful as "reactive, timely, and simple tools for combined force employment and component integration."
As airspace control measures, they are control measures only in that aircraft must remain above selected altitudes to avoid friendly surface-to-surface fire. This provides the kill box a thirddimension.
Kill boxes are color-coded (Figure 
1
27
27
28
Before Operation IRAQI FREEDOM, European Command (EUCOM) was the only major warfighting command with experience using kill boxes in a combat environment.
Operation ALLIED FORCE, an air-centric operation aimed at the removal of Serbian troops from Kosovo, used this technique to focus air assets against enemy targets. However, the lack of 
29
30
31
33
2
Consistent with joint and service doctrine, the Central Command publication on operational fires, Concept of Operations for Joint Fires, assigns commanders the responsibility for establishing FSCM within their area of operations to safeguard friendly forces and enable 34 TTP for Comma nd and Control of Joint Fires (Draft), 4-2. Though taken from the EUCOM document, this diagram is identical to one found in the ALSA Targeting manual published in 1997. See Targeting, II-23. 
35
39
These officers have said that the decision of V (US) Corps to leave closed kill boxes in its area of operations meant that as many as 80% of the AI sorties pushed to the corps at critical stages of the fight left without engaging any targets. Conversely, because the Marine Expeditionary Force routinely opened kill boxes short of the FSCL, 80% of the AI sorties sent to this area of operations expended all of their ordnance. While this critique fails to recognize the numerous other reasons why V (US) Corps might have turned aircraft away, if even partially true, it would represent the loss of a tremendous opportunity by the Corps. 
40
41
40
41 "Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (3ID)", 106; LTG William S. Wallace, "Joint Fires in OIF: What Worked for V (US) Corps (PowerPoint Briefing)," (Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Combined Arms Center, 2003), Slide 8 ; and "How We Fought OIF (PowerPoint Briefing)," (Mannheim, Germany: 4th Air Support Operations Squadron, July 17, 2003), Slide 16. Of the 45% who did not attack, problems ranged from target identification problems (45%), weapons problems or conflicts (29%), and fuel problems (20%). Only 5.9% had "miscellaneous" problems. kill boxes short of the FSCL. Instead, it says, aircraft engaged "targets in the order they appeared on the battlefield" rather than targets on the division High Payoff Target List (HPTL). 
42
Notably, but rarely mentioned, there were also at least two instances when the FSCL was too close; so close that the 3 d Infantry Division (Mechanized) had troops at risk on its "far" side. 
43
Categorizing the kill box as a FSCM, ACM, or MCM is complicated because it has features of all three. Like an FSCM, the purpose of a kill box is to "facilitate the rapid engagement of targets" and "provide safeguards for friendly forces." In most cases though, FSCM place an emphasis on protecting ground, not air forces. The kill box functions as an airspace control measure by effectively creating airspace coordination areas in blue, open, or active for air kill boxes and coordinating altitudes in purple kill boxes. Finally, it assumes MCM characteristics by facilitating ground or air freedom of action and maneuver within a designated area by restricting the actions of other components in the same area (as a boundary would).
Despite possessing boundary-like qualities, the joint force should be cautious suggesting that the kill box is an MCM. Unlike a boundary, the kill box should not separate targeting and execution responsibilities between commanders. 
44
Both Combined Forces and Central Commands manage kill boxes as FSCM. Combined Forces Command's Joint/Combined Fires says that the kill box is both an FSCM and an ACM, but it minimizes the kill box's ACM characteristics by stating that the kill box is an ACM only to the "extent that aircraft are required to remain above selected altitudes" to avoid friendly artillery fire. In Central Command, kill boxes appear in the FSCM chapter of the Concept for Joint Fires.
The same document defines the kill box as a "fire support and deconfliction measure" complementing, not precluding or conflicting with, "other fire support control measures." One could infer that CENTCOM, like CFC, sees the kill box as more FSCM than ACM. 
45
With an understanding of the three existing kill box techniques and an idea of what a kill box is and is not, this paper returns to the original question: Should the joint force standardize the kill box and incorporate it into joint doctrine? The existence of multiple, unique techniques could cause potential interoperability problems for the joint force. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some of the problems V (US) Corps, from EUCOM, and the Air Component Coordination Element, a CENTCOM staff element, experienced are attributable to a different understanding of kill boxes. Likewise, V (US) Corps procedures, like "corps CAS," that were unfamiliar to the 3 d Infantry Division bred coordination problems and frustration in both headquarters. Some standardization of techniques seems warranted, but can the kill box meet the needs of the joint force sufficiently enough to be included in joint doctrine? To answer this, a more detailed analysis of the kill box is necessary.
46
In the development of joint and service doctrine, like that involving maneuver control measures and fire support coordinating measures, doctrine writers must first conduct an analysis, not unlike the METT-TC (mission, enemy, terrain, troops, time, and civil considerations) analysis of a combat operation, to understand the environment within which the joint force operates. The mission, the nature of contemporary military operations, and the capabilities and limitations of the United States, its friends, and its enemies are just a few of the factors the doctrine writer must take into account. Beginning with a look at the contemporary operating environment, this chapter will explore some of these considerations as it defines the evaluation criteria.
A veteran of the great battles in Western Europe during 1915-1918 would have felt naked in the deserts of Kuwait and Iraq in 1991 without the benefit of the massive trench systems with which he was familiar. Shown a map, however, he could likely distinguish rear from close or deep areas and become comfortable with the relatively shoulder-to-shoulder aspect of the linear battlefield. It has been for these battlefields that contemporary joint and service doctrine exists.
Unfortunately, they belong more to history than to the future. Instead, as the prognostications of military scholars and think tanks suggest and recent operations in Afghanistan and Iraq substantiate, most contemporary battlefields are composed of non-standard force mixes using asymmetric tactics and techniques to identify and fight an invisible enemy in complex, noncontiguous, and independent areas of operation. What changed? Why?
The change is predominately the result of gross skill and technological overmatch between the United States and those who would threaten its national security interests. Combat operations in Iraq, both in 1991 and 2003, have demonstrated the superiority of Coalition, meaning American, command, control, and weapons systems against what were numerically larger forces. With its precision weapons, advanced navigational technology, state-of-the-art information systems, and superbly trained soldiers, airmen, sailors, and marines, the United States has no peer competitor. Overmatch has created both positive and negative side effects.
From the positive perspective, decisive overmatch allows the United States and its allies to achieve and sustain the initiative. The United States wishes to defeat its enemies using longrange, precise weapons, and information superiority -a friendly common operating picture matched with superior satellite-and communications-based intelligence -simultaneously and throughout the depth of the battlespace. As the rolling start in Operation IRAQI FREEDOM demonstrates, the United States can pick the time, the place, and the method of engagement almost at will and win a conventional engagement. The goal is to mass capabilities, to create a physical and psychological effect greater than the sum of its components. Called "cybershock," this new way of war demands a departure, both intellectually and physically, from the linear battlefield. 
47
Though the overmatch currently enjoyed by the United States over its enemies, real and potential, may be historic in scale, the concept is not new. Adversarial relationships have 47 Dr. James J. Schneider, "A New Form of Warfare," Military Review LXXXX, no. 1 (January-February 2000).; One need only consider OEF, OIF, or the capabilities of the Stryker Brigade to understand that the American way of war is evolving into one heavily dependent on decentralized, but joint action, covering vast areas of operation. Among other documents, see also the "Guide to Army Transformation" (Washington, D.C.: Association of the United States Army, 2001). contributed to the pursuit of match and overmatch since the beginning of warfare. It cannot, however, be forgotten as the joint force struggles with solutions to its doctrinal challenges. Joint doctrine is "written to reflect existing capabilities" -both good and bad. If one result of these capabilities is the creation of a nonlinear, noncontiguous battlefield, intended or not, the characteristics of this battlefield must influence the doctrinal development process that supports the joint force. 48
With a basic understanding of the contemporary operating environment in hand, it is possible to develop evaluation criteria for coordinating measures designed to work in this environment. There is no published standard for evaluating the feasibility, acceptability, and suitability of individual fire support coordinating measures, either during doctrine development or during the planning and execution phases of combat operations. However, careful consideration of JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support, provides options. This publication describes key definitions, identifies two key concepts -joint fire support coordination principles and basic joint fire support tasks -and suggests that these items, coupled together, provide the standard by which the joint force commander can assess the effectiveness of the joint fire support system.
It seems reasonable to expect that if these concepts evaluate the overall system, their core characteristics could form criteria useful to evaluate the effectiveness of specific fire support coordinating measures like the FSCL or kill box. Logically, if a FSCM helps the joint force accomplish these tasks or sustain these principles, it should be included in joint doctrine.
Alternatively, if the FSCM violates a coordination principle or prevents the accomplishment of a basic task, it is not a benefit, but a hindrance to the overall fire support system.
Joint Fire Support says that fires are the effects of lethal and nonlethal systems and joint fires are those fires "produced during the employment of forces from two or more components in coordinated action toward a common objective." In other words, it is neither the delivery system 48 Joint Doctrine Development System, I-2.
nor the technique that make joint fires joint. Instead, fires become joint through "flexible and responsive" coordination procedures that synchronize operations to "place the right attack means on the correct target at the precise time." This coordination includes measures designed to "deconflict attacks, avoid fratricide, reduce duplication of effort, and assist in shaping the battlespace." Fire support coordinating measures exist to help the joint force fulfill these requirements. 
49
1
Source: JP 3-09, Joint Fire Support except as noted.
Avoid  
49 Doctrine for Joint Fire Support, v and III-3. According to Joint Fire Support, the purpose of a FSCM is to "enhance the expeditious attack of targets, protect forces, populations, critical infrastructure, and sites of religious or cultural significance, and set the stage for future operations." See Doctrine for Joint Fire Support, A-1.
50 Doctrine for Joint Fire Support, III-7 and III-2. According to Joint Fire Support and FM 3-09, Doctrine for Fire Support (Final Draft), these principles evolve from the four basic fire support tasks. Similarities in these two manuals exist because the Army is the proponent for both publications. Air Force doctrinal publications do not address coordination principles or basic fire support tasks.
If accomplished, these four basic fire support tasks -support forces in contact, support the concept of operations, synchronize fire support, and sustain fire support operations -provide reasonable assurance to the joint force commander that he will achieve the desired effects on the enemy and set the conditions for decisive operations. Inherent in these tasks is the expectation that the joint force will provide "responsive fire support [throughout the area of operations] that protects and ensures freedom of maneuver," will focus on command-designated high-payoff targets, and will "continuously and concurrently" plan to synchronize joint assets to "optimize limited resources, achieve synergy, and prevent fratricide." Three themes -efficiency, synchronization, and flexibility -appear again and form the basis for the evaluation criteria. 
51
52
51
52
nor carelessly permissive. Balancing restrictions and a permissive intent, a well-defined FSCM protects the force and expedites synchronized attacks equally well. 
53
For a measure to be simple, usable, and applicable across the joint force, the joint force must also consider the impact of automation technology. The United States possesses a digitization capability far greater than its allies or potential enemies, but it does not equally distribute this technology across the joint force. Disparities exist between and within services and are particularly acute between Active and Reserve-National Guard components. The effect can be significant. Consider the impact of automation on the kill box.
Maximizing the benefits of the kill box is digitization intensive. Currently, the Advanced Field Artillery Tactical Data System, the primary fire support planning and execution tool found in Army and Marine Corps division and brigade headquarters, cannot replicate any of the three kill box techniques. Instead, these subordinate headquarters develop solutions through creative manipulation of existing FSCM, usually free fire areas and airspace coordination areas. Neither work well. Furthermore, the potential for dozens or even hundreds of 10' by 10' boxes is 53 Doctrine for Joint Fire Support, III-2. Responsiveness, according to American Heritage, implies the ability to "readily react to suggestions, influences, and efforts." enormous and exceeds the capability of AFATDS. Though surmountable -software patches are common -this challenge remains worthy of consideration. 
54
The United States should not discount these issues. Proposed doctrine should efficiently work within the battle command capabilities and technology of coalition partners without significant modification. The United States should not act in haste, but acknowledge that it takes time for each multinational partner to review, accept, and integrate new ideas. If one assumes that multinational partners will adopt American doctrine, they presuppose these partners can (culturally, philosophically, and technically) adopt American doctrine. For some of these very reasons, some aspects of coalition doctrine differ altogether from joint doctrine.
The second criterion is synchronization. Like the FSCL, most FSCM evolved from the requirement to spatially deconflict fires from maneuver or other fires. However, deconfliction is by definition, the act of separating. Frequently, FSCM provide this effect in much the same way a traffic light does, by halting one activity for the benefit of another. It is a concept opposed to 54 III (US) Corps Effects Coordination Cell, "Ulchi Focus Lens 2003: After Action Review (PowerPoint)," (September 12, 2003), Slide 13. In the briefing and during a telephone conversation with the author (on January 29, 2004), Captain Vela, 212 Field Artillery Brigade Fire Control Officer, noted the incompatibility of kill boxes and AFATDS. As a work around, the brigade used free fire areas and "handjammed" an FSCL, since CFC and Corps did not provide one, using the leading edge of green kill boxes. Only the Automated Deep Operations Coordination System (ADOCS) and C 2 personal computers (C2PC) effectively replicate the kill box without such "jury-rigging." Neither system exists at the division level or below.
Perhaps even more challenging, flexibility cannot limit precision. An FSCM must provide precise solutions to spatial challenges during the current fight while laying the framework for future operations. This implies a level of fidelity suitable for air-to-ground and ground-toground operations in the wide-open expanse of a desert and within the complex terrain of the modern metropolis. In other words, the boundaries of the measure must be neither too large nor too small, but adaptable to the mission of the joint force and the environment in which it operates. This paper proposes three evaluation criteria -efficiency, synchronization, and flexibility -rooted in doctrine. They are not quantitative in nature, but require a subjective assessment of published doctrine, guidelines, and procedures that the joint force may or may not consistently implement. To supplement this analysis, the evaluation includes observations from Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force officers who used the kill box during Operation IRAQI FREEDOM.
Is it necessary to first compare and contrast the Central Command, European Command, and Combined Forces Korea kill box techniques before beginning the evaluation? The answer is no. Though their distinctiveness served as part of the justification for this paper, none of the most significant variances -in dimensions, labeling, and establishment authorities -thwart a conceptual analysis. These differences can be resolved should the joint force choose to include the kill box technique in its doctrine. Consequently, this evaluation considers the kill box technique on the collective merits and shortcomings of all three existing variants and their performance in combat and exercise simulations. It does not seek to answer which technique is best, but if the concept, as currently written and exercised, is worth inclusion in joint doctrine. An argument for one variant over another can take place only after reaching an affirmative answer to this question.
As described earlier and shown in Appendix 3, Kill Box Evaluation Summary, the first evaluation criterion -efficiency -has multiple components. The first of these requires that the coordination measure support the mission and intent of the supported commander. It must enable the joint force to attack the right target with the right weapons system, at the right time, and without wastage or excess. In theory, the kill box appears to meet this requirement. The kill box allows the joint force commander to precis ely divide the area of operations and assign responsibilities based on the capabilities of his force. Within these divisions, the supported commander establishes target priorities, attack guidance, and intelligence collection priorities to support his operation.
During IRAQI FREEDOM, however, the kill box had mixed success fulfilling this requirement. While the "benefits of that approach [the kill box] were compelling" and numerous attacks against lucrative targets occurred that would not have occurred without open kill boxes, there were some prioritization issues. According to the 3d Infantry Division (Mechanized) after action review, the "Air Force destroyed targets as they were acquired instead of what the maneuver commander wanted destroyed." Unsynchronized attacks such as these transform the kill box into a glorified free fire area where individual pilots and observers, not supported commanders, establish priorities. For the kill box technique to effectively support the concept of operations and the prin ciple of unity of effort, the joint force must do better communicating and adhering to those priorities established by the supported commander. 
56
57
Rapid coordination also relates to the ease with which the joint force can establish or modify a coordination measure. Joint doctrine allows up to six hours to modify and disseminate the FSCL. On a dynamic battlefield, six hours is too long. In IRAQI FREEDOM, V (US) Corps was able to internally coordinate a change to a kill box status within minutes, usually as few as 57 LtCol Michael P. Connolly, electronic mail message to MAJ James W. MacGregor, "Re: Kill  Box Monograph." Received February 12-17, 2004. In this email, LtCol. Connolly, who works at the United States Air Force Air Ground Operations School, suggested that during OIF "ground commanders were reluctant to open them [kill boxes]. This was not so much due to excessive procedural steps as it was due to concerns about battle tracking...could we really ensure no friendlies were in the kill box?" five. When forced to coordinate a change outside their headquarters (with CFLCC and the Coalition Air Operations Center), it required hours of coordination. On some occasions, the evolving battlefield situation made the change outdated before it became effective. This experience suggests that when the supported commander at the lowest level is empowered to make these decisions, coordination can occur rapidly. 
58
Identifying the appropriate establishment authority, building confidence in kill boxes, and adjusting to the complexities of kill box-FSCM combinations will take time and training.
The fourth requirement of efficiency is ease of use and universal applicability across the joint force. IRAQI FREEDOM after action reviews are replete with positive comments, "worked well" and "continue [the] kill box method of clearance of fires" amongst them, but significant interoperability issues remain. Earlier this paper addressed the inability of some automated battle command systems to support the kill box technique, but it has not yet addressed the issue of kill box terminology and the impact of words on ease of use and universal applicability. 
59
59 Leaf,
22;
and "Operation Iraqi Freedom Lessons Learned:
The second terminology issue involves the labels chosen for specific kill boxes. During IRAQI FREEDOM, the "open" label confused some pilots. Was it open for them or for someone else? Green usually means "good to go," but who is a "go" in a green kill box? The terms are understandable to those familiar with them, but non-standardized and unclear terms create confusion, uncertainty, and doubt. The FSCL, with its history of confusing terms and incomplete definitions, serves as a case in point. To be readily usable across the joint force, the kill box needs clear and unambiguous terminology. 
60
61
60
61 LTC John R. McIlhaney, electronic mail message to MAJ James W. MacGregor, "Kill Box Follow-Up. " Received February 18-27, 2004.  They are more efficient, allow rapid changes and selective management of battlespace, and integration of assets where needed. Members of the 101 st Airborne Division (Air Assault)   concurred when, in their Operation IRAQI FREEDOM after action review, they wrote that kill box "grids allowed the brigade to easily and quickly de-conflict airspace to mass the effects of attack aviation, CAS, ATACMS, and JSEAD, allowing for a synergistic effect of fires at the decisive point." These comments describe the very essence of synchronization. 
62
5
The kill box, particularly the Combined Forces Command technique, provides a capability to overcome this doctrinal limitation. As shown, CFC is unique in its creation of a third kill box category -the purple or jointly controlled kill box. As with the open, active and blue kill boxes of Central, European and Combined Forces Commands respectively, the Air Force agrees that targets in purple kill boxes are suitable AI targets, no matter where the kill box is on the battlefield in relation to the FSCL. Furthermore, with a spatial separation feature (a 10,000 feet MSL artillery altitude, for example; see Figure 
5
It is the final criterion, flexibility, which gives the kill box its stiffest test. First, flexibility implies that the proposed coordination measure can support full-spectrum operations in all types of terrain. The acceptance of the kill box by combatant commands responsible for terrain as diverse as Korean, Kosovar or Afghani mountains and Iraqi deserts, suggest that the joint force believes the kill box can meet these challenges. Exercises in Korea and combat operations in Kosovo and Iraq support this claim -to a point. Some issues remain unresolved.
First, the role of kill boxes in joint urban operations remains problematic. Some suggest that the kill box, even at it smallest (which covers roughly 80 NM 2 ), is "not applicable for urban and European Command, flight over a closed or inactive for air kill box requires the establishment of corridors and other control measures.
operations, [it is] way too big." For perspective, the image shown in Figure 
6
64
65
66
7
In the process of answering this question, several conclusions become evident. First, joint doctrine does not provide a clearly understood control measure that the joint force can use to effectively synchronize operational fires. The FSCL is both inadequate and poorly implemented.
Second, a lack of procedural standardization, involving the FSCL, the kill box or any other control measure, can inhibit interoperability. Third, the kill box is useful as an operational fire support control measure, but lacks procedural standardization. Finally, there are issues of terminology and automation or digitization that the joint force must address before it includes the kill box in joint doctrine. These conclusions lead to the following three recommendations.
First, the joint force should conduct a review of the joint doctrine development process.
Without denying this process the accolades it has earned in the last eighteen years, the doctrinal crosswalk conducted for this paper suggests there remain unresolved conflicts in the system that prevent it from meeting its full potential. For example, reconsider the discussion on the FSCL.
The definition found in JP 3-09, Doctrine for Fire Support, matches that generally desired by the Army because, even though all of the services staffed the manual, the Army wrote it and defined the terms found within it. One might imagine that if the Air Force had written the same publication, the definition would say, "must coordinate" instead of "must inform." After all, the Air Force has written its own doctrine using these words.
There are several questions worthy of exploration. Who should be responsible for developing joint doctrine? How can the Joint Staff develop sound doctrine unfettered by servicebias and parochialism? Which topics belong in joint doctrine and which in service doctrine? Should they overlap or should some topics exist exclusively in one or the other? If so, how is this clearly identified establishment authority and responsibilities, and a description of employment and coordination requirements. To that end, this paper proposes the following joint definition (for inclusion in JP 1-02, Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms):
Maneuver-Effects Synchronization Area (MESA). A three-dimensional fire support coordinating measure established and adjusted by a supported commander to rapidly integrate the lethal and non-lethal effects of his organic assets with those provided by one or more supporting commanders in order to achieve specific targeting, intelligence, or maneuver objectives.
In addition, and to stay consistent with current doctrinal formats, JP 3-09, Joint Fires, should contain an expanded description. For the MESA, it would look like this: Maneuver-Effects Synchronization Area (MESA) Purpose. The supported commander establishes maneuver-effects synchronization areas within his area of operations to rapidly integrate the effects of maneuver with lethal and non-lethal fires in support of his concept of operations and targeting objectives. The MESA achieves this purpose by simplifying the clearance of fires process and clearly delineating battlefield coordination requirements between land, maritime, special forces, and air components.
Establishment. Within the limits of his designated area of operations, a supported commander establishes coordination requirements by designating MESA as brown (land, special forces, or maritime operations), blue (air operations), or purple (joint operations). At no time does the supported commander relinquish his responsibility to plan and establish targeting, intelligence, and maneuver priorities and objectives throughout his area of operations. Graphic Portrayal. The MESA is a three-dimensional area defined by the eastern, southern, western, and northern boundaries of a standard JCGRS grid (and its subsections) and a surface-to-surface fires maximum ordinate altitude (established in theater by the Joint Force Commander).
Employment. A brown MESA implies the presence or close proximity of friendly forces. Surface-to-surface fires may attack targets within the limits of existing maneuver control (boundaries, phase lines, etc.) and fire support coordinating measures (CFL, NFA, RFA, etc.). CAS may engage targets under Type 1 terminal attack control (and Type 2 or 3 as approved by the supported commander). A blue MESA provides reasonable assurance that the area is devoid of friendly forces. The ACC may conduct attacks into these areas without coordination (lethal attacks do not require terminal attack control). Surface-tosurface fires into or through a blue MESA require coordination with the ACC. A purple MESA allows simultaneous fires and may contain a limited number of friendly ground troops (usually special operations forces). The LCC or JSOTF must establish an NFA or RFA to protect these troops and their activities. Verification of active NFA and RFA is the only coordination an aircraft must conduct before engaging targets in a purple MESA. In a purple MESA, only aircraft conducting CAS require terminal attack control. Surfaceto-surface fires cannot exceed the maximum ordinate altitude unless coordinated with the ACC. In all MESA, both lethal and non-lethal attacks must comply with the targeting priorities of the supported commander. When the LCC does not provide terminal attack control, the ACC must make a reasonable effort to conduct battle damage assessment after each attack. Aircraft may transit a MESA, without regard to its status, at or above the surface-to-surface fires maximum ordinate altitude. Surface-to-surface fires through the airspace above this altitude require coordination with the ACC. 
70
As part of adopting the MESA, the Joint Staff should begin those processes necessary to address automated battle command system shortcomings and bilateral negotiations with allied and coalition partners to establish the MESA as NATO, ABCA, and CFC doctrine. Though a failure in the latter task should not prevent adoption of the MESA by the United States military, an inability to address the former would continue to require some elements of the joint force to manage temporary solutions that increase risk to the mission and friendly forces. The joint force must develop and implement automated battle command systems that not only allow, but facilitate the exchange of information between service components at all echelons of command.
The relationship between the MESA or kill box and the FSCL remains undefined. With the exception of the Combined Forces Korea, which minimized the role of the FSCL during ULCHI FOCUS LENS 2003, no senior Army or Air Force leader or organization has called for the elimination of the FSCL. In fact, senior Air Force leaders maintain that the FSCL serves as an important measure, as an "intellectual framework between close and deep" and as a division of responsibility between elements of the theater air-ground system. This division is of no slight 
70
importance. Violations of this unofficial boundary could lead to the inefficient application of assets and an increased likelihood of fratricide. 
71
For now, this is a reasonable means to establish the location of the FSCL on the battlefield. Perhaps, for the first time in years, both air-and ground-proponents have found a solution acceptable to both. 
71
Purple kill boxes provide the best opportunity to integrate the combined effects of all fixed-wing assets, both CAS and AI, and surface fires. Just as in the blue kill box, AI can attack targets on either side of the FSCL, if used. CAS, though not normally flown into these kill boxes, is available to support the limited number of ground units, usually special operations forces, one might find operating in a purple kill box. NFA and RFA protect these ground units and their activities. An artillery altitude, like that of the green kill box, but at a lower altitude, creates spatial separation between air assets and surface-to-surface trajectories. The Battlefield Coordination Detachment (BCD) is responsible for coordinating all attack assets operating within a purple kill box.
Purple kill boxes provide the best opportunity to integrate the combined effects of all fixed-wing assets, both CAS and AI, and surface fires. Just as in the blue kill box, AI can attack targets on either side of the FSCL, if used. CAS, though not normally flown into these kill boxes, is available to support the limited number of ground units, usually special operations forces, one might find operating in a purple kill box. NFA and RFA protect these ground units and their activities. An artillery altitude, like that of the green kill box, but at a lower altitude, creates spatial separation between air assets and surface-to-surface trajectories. The Battlefield Coordination Detachment (BCD) is responsible for coordinating all attack assets operating within a purple kill box.
32  
32  
Beyond the land component forward boundary, this responsibility rests with the Air Component Commander (ACC).
Beyond the land component forward boundary, this responsibility rests with the Air Component Commander (ACC).
Maj Gen Daniel P. Leaf, "Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (CFLCC ACCE)" (Headquarters, United States Central Command Air Forces, April
28, 2003), 4-5.
Though called the "Joint" Target Reference Grid System, this grid system technique applies only to those joint forces assigned to the European Command, not to all joint forces of the United States.
 
Though not specified in the Concept for Fires, it is possible to assume that the Joint Special Operations Task Force Commander (JSOTF) would manage kill box statuses within the boundaries of his assigned Joint Special Operations Area (JSOA).
"Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (3ID)", 32 and 109.
Leaf, 22; Wallace, Slide 22;  and "Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (3ID)", 106 and 112. LTG Wallace, MG Leaf, 4 th ASOS, and 3 ID(M) all point out the positive aspects of the kill box or suggest its retention.
By definition, the FSCL "does not divide an area of operations by defining a boundary." However, in practice, the FSCL is the point at which the LCC passes significant portions of his battlefield responsibilities (intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) and targeting execution) to the ACC.
Joint/Combined Fires (Korea) 48; and Concept of Operations for Joint Fires.
See "Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (3ID)", 106-109. LTC Thomas Kelly argues that "different equipment and procedures" caused coordination issues between the BCD and COAC, drawn from different combatant commands.Kelly and Andreason: 25.   
Leaf, 22;  and "Operation Iraqi Freedom -After Action Report (3ID)", 109. In the particular example, MG Leaf provides in his AAR, the Coalition killed 24 Iraqi main battle tanks that were short of the FSCL, but within an open kill box. MG Leaf believes that without the kill box being open, these attacks would not have taken place. Under existing joint doctrine, the tanks, being out of ground-based direct and indirect weapons system range, would have found "sanctuary."
A nautical mile is equal to slightly less than two kilometers (1.86) and slightly more than one mile. The 10' x 10' kill box is approximately 80 nm 2 . Based on the curvature of the earth this size varies (as longitudinal lines converge at the poles and diverge at the equator), but in Korea a 10' x 10' kill box is 10 NM by 8 NM in size. This 80 nm 2 kill box is roughly 273 km 2 or 105.8 mi 2 .
COL Michael P. Marletto, electronic mail message to MAJ James W.MacGregor, "Kill Box  Questions." Received February 4, 2004.   
I chose this topic in the interests of expanding my understanding of a complicated operational fire support issue and perhaps contributing to its resolution. While I have
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
The table in Appendix 2, Comparing Kill Box Techniques, illustrates the differences among these three techniques. Whether these differences are the result of the characteristics of the theater -friendly forces, the nature of the threat, and the terrain -or personalities is relevant, but difficult to determine. Is the expected nature of combat on the Korean peninsula -where terrain constrains mobility and slows the pace of offensive action -the critical factor in the decision by CFC to employ kill boxes and minimize the role of the FSCL? Has mobile desert warfare driven CENTCOM to maintain the FSCL while incorporating kill boxes? While these are worthy questions, an analysis of the kill box can proceed without additional discussion on the FSCL. However, existing kill box procedures do not definitively answer one pivotal question the paper must address before continuing. Is the kill box a fire support coordinating measure, an airspace control measure (ACM), a maneuver control measure contemporary joint and service concepts that stress the synergistic effect of synchronization.
What the joint force desires is a traffic circle, a technique able to synchronize, in time, space, and purpose, the system without stopping the forward progress of its components.
To demonstrate the emphasis, consider the words "deconflict" and "synchronize" in joint doctrine. "Deconflict(ion)" appears in Joint Fire Support 11 times and always in the context of separation. On the other hand, "synchronization" appears in the same manual 38 times (or almost once every other page). Furthermore, the opening paragraph of Joint Fire Support stresses that the joint force "must synchronize a variety of fires in time, space, and purpose to increase the total effectiveness of the joint force." Joint doctrine "recognizes the fundamental and beneficial effects of teamwork and unity of effort, and the synchronization and integration of military operations in time, space, and purpose." With this in mind, the ability to synchronize becomes the second evaluation criterion. 
55
55 Doctrine for Joint Operations, ix. Author added emphasis. American Heritage says synchronization is "to operate in unison" or "to make into a whole by joining a system of parts." The product of synchronization is synergy which American Heritage defines as the "interaction of two or more agents or forces so that their combined effect is greater than the sum of their individual effects" and "cooperative interaction among groups … that creates an enhanced effect." boxes, you really have a very flexible way of delineating battlespace both in time and on the ground. 67 Additionally, real-world experience has shown that it is possible to change the status of a kill box in a matter of minutes. The ease with which the joint force can manage each kill box suggests that it can also configure them to meet the current and future needs of the joint force commander. One possible shortcoming, discussed earlier is the inability of the name "kill box" to describe ongoing non-lethal combat or non-combat operations.
Appendix 3, Kill Box Evaluation Summary, provides a consolidated review of the evaluation discussed above. The kill box fulfills each of the three criteria -efficiency, synchronization, and flexibility -albeit with limitations. Some of these limitations, like those involving automation and multinational interoperability, merely need time -to develop new software or conduct multilateral discussions -to find resolution. Others, like issues of confidence and terminology, suggest that the joint force needs additional doctrinal discourse and training 
67
68
Since the dawn of industrial age warfare, commanders have sought ways to maximize the combined effects of maneuver and firepower. A demanding task on battlefields cluttered with horse-drawn artillery and foot infantry, the task became more challenging with the advent of mechanization and flight. In the early years of both, the struggle to define the roles of these new weapon systems prevented anything more than ad hoc attempts to integrate their effects.
When double tragedy struck the officers and men of the 30 th Infantry Division in Normandy at the end of July 1944, it became apparent that these informal solutions, even those based on detailed planning and professional relationships were inadequate. The problem lacked clear definition and precise solutions. After the Second World War, the armed services sought answers in doctrine. Ultimately, these attempts to coordinate force protection and the effects of "fires not under the control of the corps [but] which may effect current tactical operations" led to the adoption of the Fire Support Coordination Line (FSCL). 
69
In response, and only after rejecting numerous other proposed techniques, some elements of the joint force -Central Command, European Command, and Combined Forces Commanddeveloped the kill box. All three created techniques repeatedly tested and proven in simulations 
69
partition determined? Satisfactorily answering some of these questions might go a long way towards increasing the effectiveness and utility of joint doctrine.
Next, the joint force should accept the three criteria -efficiency, synchronization, and flexibility -as tools to analyze and evaluate existing and proposed fire support coordinating measures. Though not required on a routine basis by the military at-large, they are doctrinally based tools useful for the joint doctrine writer or as points of reference during conversations on this subject. At a minimum, they provide reasonably well-defined terms and boundaries within which to structure study in this area.
Finally, and most importantly, this paper recommends that the joint force adopt the kill box technique as a doctrinal method to synchronize the effects of operational fires. Since the term "kill box" is an inadequate description of what the coordination measure seeks to accomplish (the synchronization of all lethal and non-lethal operational fires and effects), doctrine should abandon this term and adopt more inclusive terminology. This paper proposes the term Maneuver-Effects Synchronization Area to highlight the varying activities for which a commander might set aside a particular portion of the battlefield.
To support adoption of the Maneuver-Effects Synchronization Area (MESA), this paper recommends that the joint force standardize the structure and labeling of common grid reference systems. Though all three commands in question -Central, European, and Combined Forces Commands -use variants of the ALSA-defined CGRS, the means by which each command subdivides the basic 30' x 30' "square" is not standardized. Furthermore, each labels the basic "square" differently. Joint doctrine should standardize the 10' x 10' sub-section and establish a common naming convention for both the square and its subsections. CGRS squares would become MESA when the combatant commander established a joint operations area and a supported commander designated one or more grids for a specific time or activity.
The third part of this recommendation involves a joint definition and description. A properly developed coordinating measure has three elements: a clearly articulated purpose,  
• Supports full-spectrum operations in all terrain regardless of battlefield construct (contiguous or noncontiguous, linear or nonlinear) • Supports current and future operations • Allows precise solutions to battlefield management challenges Positive: 1. Facilitates detailed deliberate planning, but can be adjusted in minutes to less than an hour 2. Supports all forms of action -operational maneuver (air assault, rotary-wing deep attacks, etc.) and operational fires Negative: 1. Even the smallest kill box, at 10' x 10', is too imprecise to support urban operations or tactical action 2. Creates sanctuary on the tactical battlefield (but no more so than the FSCL) 