# ID: fe592437f41643ae96619ff955030b3d
# Title: Airpower as a Tool of Foreign Policy Two Case Studies of Airpower 's Use: The Philippines in 1941 and Berlin in 1948
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
The purpose of this work is to provide insight for the operational air planner who must determine the circumstances under which airpower can be an effective tool of foreign policy. With insight into this issue, both the air strategist and diplomat may be better equipped to evaluate the appropriateness of
This study represents the views of the author and does not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the Department of the Air Force or the School of Advanced Airpower Studies.
In accordance with Air Force Regulation 110-8, it is not copyrighted, but is the property of the United States Government.
The United States is now the world's only military superpower. Our nation not only stands at a crossroads in history, but "the collapse of the Soviet Union and our collective victory in the Cold War have fundamentally changed the strategic environment." 1 As a result, constraints imposed for fear of nuclear escalation between the former Soviet Union and the United States have all but disappeared. With the fear of nuclear escalation as a result of superpower confrontation diminished, the role of military capability in foreign policy is reemerging as a significant tool of foreign policy. Thus, today's geopolitics permit more flexible consideration of the use of force, a trend reinforced by contemporary technological capabilities. Airpower, which many consider to be the leading edge of military capability, is significant in the influence of military might in foreign policy. Airpower's qualities of responsiveness, flexibility, range, stealth, intelligence gathering capability, and lethality make it attractive to policy makers.
If airpower is to engage in a leading role, we must determine the circumstances under which airpower can be an effective tool of foreign policy. Answering this question is the central burden of this study. With insight into this issue, both the air strategist and the diplomat should become better equipped to evaluate the appropriateness of airpower in international relations.
1 George Bush, National Security Strategy of the United States, January 1993 
(Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993)
To answer the question requires a brief discussion of definitions, concepts, and a framework for analysis, which will be presented in the rest of this chapter. Next, the study examines two uses of airpower in foreign policy from a historical perspective.
Chapter Two analyzes the use of B-17s in U.S. diplomatic maneuvers shortly before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. It seeks to answer three specific questions. How was airpower amalgamated with foreign policy by stationing B-17s in the Philippines in late 1941? How well did this action support national security objectives? What were the particular circumstance of airpower employment? Chapter Three moves ahead to June 1948 and asks the same questions in a new environment; the Blockade of Berlin. In the seven years since 1941 the world had changed dramatically. World War II was over, but the Cold War was just beginning. The Berlin Blockade was the first major diplomatic challenge in the Cold War era. Chapter Four searches for common threads and historical insights by offering a comparison of the two studies, conclusions and implications.
A first step is needed to explain what "airpower" is and what "foreign policy" means. Major General William 'Billy' Mitchell, an air commander in World War I and an outspoken proponent for exploiting the airplane's potential, defined airpower as: ". . . the ability to do something in the air. It consists of transporting all sorts of things by aircraft from one place to another, and as air covers the whole world there is no place that is immune from influence by aircraft.." 2 General Henry H.Arnold, as the commander of the Army Air Forces, claimed: "Air power is not composed alone of the war making components of aviation. It is the total aviation activity -civilian and military, commercial and private, potential as well as existing." 3 A more recent definition put 2 Maj Gen William Mitchell, Winged Defense: The Development and possibilities of Modern Air 
Power -Economic and
Military (Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, first published in 1925, reissued in 1971), xii.
Van Nostrand Co., Inc., 1959), 305.
Also critical is the concept that connects military capability as an instrument in foreign policy. Thus, a synthesis of the above definitions will be used to define 'airpower' for the purpose of this thesis. Airpower is the ability to use a platform, or deny the use of a platform with our own assets, operating in or passing through the aerospace medium for military or foreign policy purposes .
What is meant by 'foreign policy'? Foreign policy is the interaction between nations concerned generally with international political, economic, scientific, cultural, and legal relationships. 6 There is an overlap of foreign policy with national security policy. National security policy focuses primarily on the specific features of military 4 Air Force Manual 1-1, Vol. 1, "Basic Aerospace Doctrine of the United States Air Force" (Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, November 1991), 5. The terms 'airpower' and 'aerospace power' are one and the same for the purposes of this paper. Both terms refer to the environment that consists of the entire expanse above the earth's surface. For a comprehensive discussion of the concept of 'airpower', see Group Captain A G B Vallance, RAF, ed., Air Power Doctrine (United Kingdom: Crown 
Copyright, 1990)
To discover how airpower and foreign policy relate to each other requires a systematic examination of their interaction. To that end this study will ask the following questions of each case:
1. How was the military objective translated into a specific mission for airpower? 2. How was airpower employed?
3. What conditions influenced airpower's employment? 4. How much did airpower contribute to accomplishing the military and political objective?
5. What aspects of the situation were most significant in influencing the outcome? 7 Ibid., 4. There are many facets concerning the overlap of foreign policy with national security policy. Significant in the overlap is alliance politics and coercive diplomacy. Since the focus of this thesis is an analysis of historical cases studies, a discussion of coercive diplomacy, compellence, deterrence, and other political science perspectives are beyond the scope of this paper. However, these concepts play an integral part in the application of foreign policy and national security strategy. For further discussion on these topics, consult Amos A. Jordan, American National Security: Policy and Process (The John Hopkins Universiy Press, 1989), Alexander George s The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy 
(Little, Brown and Company 1971)
(Yale University Press, 1966)
This framework provides a systematic methodology for analyzing under what circumstances airpower can be an effective tool of foreign policy. The following is an amplification of the first five questions. Questions six and seven need no elaboration.
What was the political objective and how was it translated into a military objective?
The lack of a clearly stated political objective which can be translated into a coherent military objective can undermine the execution of foreign policy. The Korean War, the Bay of Pigs and Vietnam are three examples. In contrast, the outcome of the Gulf War reflects the success of deliniating clear political objectives and translating them into equally clear military objectives. The question 'what was the political objective and how was it translated into a military objective?' specifically searches for clearly defined and logically linked political and military objectives in each of the cases studied.
A pivotal relationship between defining and understanding the political objective and translating it into a military objective is key for success or failure of an air plan.
Knowing the political objective is important for two reasons. First, a political objective influences the directions taken by military leadership. It is the destination at which the military must arrive. If this destination is not articulated, it is impossible to determine if it has been achieved. Secondly, it is important to know the political objective in order to determine the feasibility of using the military to achieve it. If the political objective is beyond the means of military capability, it will not be achieved by using the military. An example is the Cuban Missle Crisis. An option considered by the United States was a surprise air attack that used precision bombing to eliminate missle installations.
However, the commander of the Tactical Air Command told President Kennedy that he could not be "absolutely certain of destroying all the missles sites and nuclear weapons with a surprise attack." 9 Since Kennedy required near-absolute assurance of destruction to justify the risk of pre-emptive strikes, he chose to forgo this option.
Determining a military course of action should only come after a political objective is defined. At this point, military commanders can identify a specific military mission. For these reasons, it is important to know what the political objective is and how it can be translated into a military objective.
How was the military objective turned into a specific mission for airpower and how was airpower employed?
For airpower to be effective, planners must be able to translate the military objective into a specific airpower mission. At the operational level, this involves integrating doctrine, situation analysis, and airpower systems to achieve the objective.
An example is World War II. The United States Army Air Forces used the doctrine of massive, daylight, high-altitude, precision bombing. This doctrine was combined with an analysis of German economic vital centers. Strategic air forces were directed against Germany's industry in support of the political objective of unconditional surrender. This paper analyzes how this process took place under conditions of more limited foreign policy objectives.
A number of factors influence airpower's employment.  
1947-1972 (Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama: Air command, control, communication, and
There seems to be a growing reliance today on the use of the military as an instrument of foreign policy. There are several reasons: the constraints imposed by the prospects of a superpower confrontation are fading with the dissolution of the former Soviet Union; the international community looks to the United States for leadership; and technological advances allow for the application of military might across a broader spectrum than before. In such an atmosphere, airpower may be called upon to play a significant role as an instrument of foreign policy. For this reason it is useful to examine the circumstances under which airpower can be used effectively in foreign policy. 
University, 1973)
Fort McKinley, P.I.
1941 was a year of heated debate among the political leaders of the United States.
At issue was the conduct of foreign relations while war was being waged all over the globe. The political leadership agreed there was a need to ensure the country's national defense. The question was 'how?' President Roosevelt wanted to direct the country's efforts toward joining military power to national policy. His policy was to avert war, but if that failed, to be prepared to fight. In other words, Roosevelt wanted to deter aggressors through a show of force. This was especially true in the Far East. The show of force was realized by sending the U.S. Fleet to Pearl Harbor, extending naval patrols, and reinforcing ground and air units in the Philippines. Reinforcing air units in the Philippines is the focus of this chapter.
As the threat of Japanese aggression against the U.S. and its potential ally Great Britain became more apparent, three factors converged with respect to keeping Japan in line. The first idea was that Japan was susceptible to aerial intimidation. The Spanish Civil War and Munich had recently shown that the potency of air raids on cities lay more in its threat than its actual use. Airplanes, especially the bomber, could be used to inflict psychological terror, and hopefully political intimidation. Second was Roosevelt's decision in July to defend and reinforce the Philippines. He did this against the advice of General George C. Marshall, Army Chief of Staff, and Admiral Harold R. Stark, Chief of Naval Operations. Up to this time, War Department plans had assumed that the Philippines were indefensible. 10 Roosevelt's decision assumed otherwise. A final factor was Roosevelt's infatuation with airpower. In November, 1938, Roosevelt ordered American plant capacity to produce 10,000 combat airplanes a year. In 
May, 1940,
Tensions in the conduct of U.S. foreign policy had been growing for a decade.      were not specifically evaluated by either the political or the military leadership.
In April 1941, the governments of Japan and the U.S. began conversations directed at improving their deteriorating relationship. Prince Konoye related the progress of Japanese-American negotiations during the time of his second and third cabinets in his memoirs. These memoirs were cited at the Pearl Harbor Hearings in 1946.
While the complicated and prolonged diplomatic negotiations were being conducted between Tokyo and Washington, in Tokyo itself, a question of special significance was being deliberated upon by the cabinet. The question was whether to continue negotiations indefinitely with America, or whether to break them off abruptly. And more important still, they were considering whether war with America would follow upon the heels of the breaking off of negotiations. 29
Negotiations dragged on. By October 1941, the Japanese felt the ". . . United States had already discovered the innermost mind of Japan, [and] it will henceforth only drag out negotiations as long as possible." Japanese leaders felt that if negotiations were to extend 28 Pearl Harbor Attack Hearings, part 20, 4443, 4444 29 Ibid., part 20, 4003 themselves, ". . . the longer they did so the better it would be for the United States." 30 For all intents and purposes, negotiations were deadlocked and Japan prepared for war with America. According to Prime Minister Tojo, if Japan continued with negotiations deadlocked and broken economic relations, even without war, the final consequences would be gradual impoverishment. Japan was concerned about survival. Tojo concluded, "That was the reason for reaching the decision to go to open hostilities, . . .
." 31 On November 15, 1941, at the 69th Liaison Conference, the leaders of Japan adopted the following national policy objectives and military objectives:
1. We will endeavor to quickly destroy American, British, and Dutch bases in the Far East, and assure our self-preservation and self-defense. . . .and to destroy the will of the United States to continue the war. 2. Our Empire will engage in a quick war, and will destroy American . . . bases in Eastern Asia and in the Southwest Pacific region. 32
In order to accomplish the second object, Japan's first phase of operations included an invasion of the Philippines. This was to be carried out by the 2nd Fleet, comprising two battleships, two small aircraft carriers, 11 heavy cruisers, seven light cruisers, 52 
As mentioned above, for airpower to be effective, air planners must be able to translate the military objective into a specific air mission. Coincident with the political objective, the military objective in this case was to use American air assets to deter
Japanese expansion and interdict it if it moved south. However, in the rush to get aircraft to the Philippines, the ". . . question of what to do with them when they reached the Philippines received hasty, sometimes conflicting answers from the military staff." 34
How were the few AAF units in the Philippines to be used to deter Japanese expansion or interdict Japanese forces should they move south? Air strategists noted that Japan "would be impressed" if the B-17s being sent to the Philippines followed a route through Siberia, then "along the edge of Japan," exposing the vulnerability of "vital Japanese industrial establishments." This plan did not materialize when the Soviets refused  
_Ibid.,
[110]
[111]
11.
Had a meeting yesterday with General Brereton in regard to the Philippine Air Force. General Marshall told him very plainly that the Philippine situation had been raised to a first priority. Meeting today to answer any questions that General Brereton may ask about the situation over there. 38 A look at the make-up of the AWPD may indicate the content of Colonel George's briefing to Brereton on October 16. The function of the Air War Plans Division staff was to prepare the overall plans for the AAF. AWPD was divided into a plans group and a projects group. The plans group consisted of a "strategical & joint plans policy" section, and three theater sections representing geographical areas: (1) Far East;
(2) Europe, Africa and Near East; and (3) Western Hemisphere. The responsibility of the theater sections was to develop air phases of war plans for operational theaters. One of the principal duties of each theater section was to prepare air estimates of the situation within their geographic area. The estimates were to cover such questions as: What kind of air warfare will the enemy employ? How well are they prepared -economically as well as for air warfare? What concentrations and movements of the AAF are required to defeat them in the air? What personnel, equipment, supplies, etc.? 39 After the plans group formulated plans for the air component, the project group was to work out details such as facilities needed to support and maintain the force. This group was to correlate activities with other agencies doing similar work for the ground forces and the Navy. 40 However, an analysis of the Air War Plans Division on 
November 13, 1941
Meeting, October 16, 1941
, 1. HRA file #145.96-220. 38 Ibid. 39 AWPD Report No. 4, November 13,1941
[AWPD] stated that they hoped to have completed by Saturday [6 December] a Far Eastern plan giving complete up-to-date information. This will be in looseleaf form, to be corrected as corrections are necessary. It is planned to furnish copies to General Marshall, General Arnold, General Spaatz, War Plans Division and a working copy retained in AWPD. . . . In preparation of this, AWPD will need the assistance of some of the other divisions. 43
It appears that prior to Pearl Harbor, there was no solid doctrine or plan for the employment airpower as a deterrent. Neither was there any detailed air war plan for the Far Eastern theater. It appears that both the political and military leadership either had an exagerated estimate of the deterrent effect of a few B-17s or that they recognized the force inadequacy but were willing to accept the risk, believing that some deterrent was 
The U.S. industrial infrastructure and inventories on hand did not permit the immediate shipment of modern airplanes to the Philippines. Aircraft availability, intelligence estimates, air base suitability and equipment, distance and weather were significant conditions that influenced both American and Japanese employment of aviation.
In spite of the significant international turmoil in Europe and Asia during the early and mid 1930's, it was not until 1939 that the U.S. turned away from neutrality restrictions and began to prepare for the possibility of war. 
Several shortcomings existed in Army Air Air Force Intelligence during the fall of 1941. Surprisingly, these deficiencies started at the top with the chief of the Army Air Forces. General Arnold states in his book, Global Mission, that he never had access to all the secret information available to most high-ranking officers in the War and Navy Departments relating to Japanese movement in the Pacific. "For instance, I never saw copies of the intercepts of the Japanese cables and radiograms, nor the breakdowns of their code messages, until after Pearl Harbor." 53 Consequently, Arnold's knowledge of what the Japanese were doing was sketchy. "I did not know the Japs were fortifying some of the mandated islands and putting air bases where[ever] they could." 54 A possible consequence of Arnold's absence of information filtered down into the AWPD.
The analysis of the AWPD submitted to General Muir S. Fairchild on 
November 13, 1941
Arnold, Global Mission (New York: Harper & Row, 1949), 209. 54 Ibid., 210.
"When he got down, he made a report but was pointedly disbelieved. He never got over it. He would go off and swear to himself." 58 Another fault with intelligence was underestimating the enemy's capability. The plan to reinforce the Philippines and to use heavy bombers as a deterrent was dependent upon the bombers' ability to reach Japanese bases in Indo-China and Formosa, from where it was thought that Japanese aircraft could not effectively retaliate. 59 Apparently unknown to Air Force intelligence, the Japanese 11th Air Fleet based on Formosa carried out a program to extend the range of its Zero fighters so they could fly cover to the Philippines and back. 60 Without this vital information on Japanese capabilities, the U.S. 55 Report 
No. 4, November 13, 1941, 14. 56 Craven and Cate, Vol. 1, 191
While documentation for this area is scarce, it can be assumed that this was not as great a concern to the Japanese as it was to the U.S. The Japanese were operating from established land bases and aircraft carriers within relatively short distances from the mainland of Japan. Since they had been pursuing their systematic expansion of the Empire for some years, most facilities from which they operated could be considered fairly well established.
The race against time for the U.S. was significantly affected by two factors: the distance between the U.S. and the Philippines and the weather. While aircraft production programs and airfield development were under way, there was nothing that could be done to shorten the 10 thousand mile distance between the U.S. and the Philippines. Weather also hampered the movement of aircraft. An example of this friction is detailed in the movement of the 19th Bombardment Group's B-17s from Hamilton Field California to the Philippines. On October 16, 1941, the 19th Group was alerted for deployment to the Philippines. Due to maintenance delays, the last bomber reached Hawaii on 22 October.
68 
Brereton,
22
From Hawaii, the entire movement of aircraft was ". . . plagued by unfavorable weather .
. . ." 69 It wasn't until November sixth, twenty-one days after their initial alert, that all but one of the B-17s arrived in the Philippines.
For the Japanese, distance was less significant, southern Japan to Formosa being approximately one thousand milies. As far as weather considerations, the Japanese could control the weather no more than the Americans. 
With the attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequently the Philippines, all hope for deterring Japanese aggression through a show of strength vanished. The harsh reality was that the U.S. political and military objectives of stationing significantly threatened the Japanese nor deterred them from hostile action against the Philppines. 71
Deterrence concerns estimating and influencing an adversary's intentions. When the United States realized diplomatic negotiations with Japan were stalemated, both the political and military leadership turned to airpower as a tool of foreign policy to deter Japanese aggression and buy time for a U.S. military build up. In essence, U.S.
leadership hoped that the threat of military action against Japanese aggression would check Japan's advances for some undetermined period of time. However, the inability to 69 
Craven and Cate,
Vol. 1,
182. 70 Ibid.,
203. 71
Using airpower as a deterrent had many shortcomings. First, time was critical and quickly running out. While the U.S. had planned extensively for a war with Japan since 1904, resources for executing the plan did not exist. Between 1939 and 1941 America awakened to the dangers of global conflict and began to mobilize. However, a hollow military and a late start of rearmament in 1941 prevented the US from carrying out all its plans. The attempt to use airpower as a tool of diplomacy in the Philippines was too little, too late. Second, the military objective was never clearly translated into a specific airpower mission. There was no definitive mission for airpower in the Philippines, nor was there doctrine to guide its use. Third was the failure of reinforcements to arrive on schedule due to the lack of aircraft in the U.S., the long distance required to travel and bad weather. Not only were material resources inadequate, but the infrastructure in the U.S. needed to produce material resources was not yet fully mobilized. The inadequacy of the force was exacerbated by the inadequacy of Philippine airfields and support. And all these factors were greatly complicated by the vacuum of intelligence concerning the enemy's strength, capabilities, and intentions. Hindsight suggests that for the U.S. politico-military leadership to have implemented a successful plan using air assets as the tool of diplomacy each of these shortcomings needed to be addressed. Airpower cannot implement foreign policy if the resources and support are not in place. An appraisal of the air dimension given by Imperial Navy Admiral Tomoika after the war lends credence One thousand planes in the Philippines, at least equal in performance to the best then available to the Japanese . . . and dispersed on some 50 airfields, would have seriously impeded the original Japanese advance if knowledge of their existence had not entirely dissuaded the Japanese from making the attempt. 74
Given the impossibility of putting 500-1000 airplanes in the Philippines in late 1941, the lack of support on the islands for the bombers that were there, and the ignorance of enemy intentions and capabilities, it is clear that the concept of airpower as a deterrent force had not been adequately thought through. Hap Arnold was fond of observing that, "Air power is not made up of airplanes alone. Air power is a composite of airplanes, air crews, maintenance crews, air bases, air supply, and sufficient replacements in both planes and crews . . What I can't figure out is why we never plan ahead and have things ready. Take the Philippines, --not enough pursuit to defend one airport. They knew this was coming and yet, only a few outmoded planes were there. Why not send first-class equipment instead of A-24's, P-40's and B-18's. They could have changed the story.
Lieutenant Roland R. Birnn from his war diary, 20 December 1941.
As a political weapon, the air lift has been tremendously effective. Even the Russians have found no answer to it. They ridiculed it in their German-language newspapers in Berlin, but the citizens of the capital looked aloft and, seeing flour and coal coming to them on wings, laughed at the efforts of the Soviet propagandists. Only history can decide how vitally important in political terms the air lift will have been.
Colliers 
Magazine, Sept.25,1948
October 4-8, 1948, 4.
In Germany in 1948, people who just three years earlier had fought each other were learning to work together. Allies who fought together were learning to govern together. There was hope for more stability in Europe. By June 1948, the hope was quickly disappearing. A deteriorating relationship between the Soviet Union and the West, diverging policy differences concerning the governing of Germany, and the maneuvering of political giants to fill the vacuum created by Germany's defeat signaled a turning point in the Cold War. Either by design or good fortune, there was a guarantee in writing between the West and the Soviet Union that entitled the West to the use of three twenty-mile-wide air corridors leading into Berlin from the West. This guarantee turned out to be fortuitous when the Soviet Union challenged the West for control of Berlin with a blockade. It allowed what came to be known as Operation Vittles (the American portion of the Berlin airlift) to meet the Soviet challenge of a land blockade. For both psychological and practical reasons, the U.S had to maintain its presence in Berlin. The decision of how to meet the Soviet challenge was made in Washington: keep Berlin alive through airlift until a diplomatic solution could be reached. In this confrontation no combative force was used to conduct foreign policy. A new chapter opened for American airpower and its relationship with foreign policy. As Air Force magazine noted in September of 1948, For the first time in history, the United States is employing its Air Force as a diplomatic weapon. . . . . in keeping with its coming of age as the nation's first line of defense the USAF has taken on two big assignments in international affairs. . .  105 
Davison,
113. 106 Ibid.,
[204]
[205]
1) the action would underline to the American people how seriously their government viewed the current sequence of events 2) it would give the U.S. Air Force experience in this kind of operation and also accustom the British to accommodate the forces of an allied power and 3) once the planes were sent, they would become somewhat of an accepted fixture 109
The U.S.' political objectives were thus translated into a dual Air Force mission.
support American foreign policy, airlift was used to feed the city of Berlin and maintain an Allied presence. Second, long-range nuclear capable aircraft, notably B-29s, were deployed to Europe as a concrete token of American commitment to European defense.
The aircraft signaled a warning to the Russians: any further aggression in Berlin might provoke air action against them.
When  112 Tunner, 152-224, and Charles J. V. 
Murphy, "The Berlin Airlift," Fortune, 38, no. 5, 5 November 1948, 92.
Between June 1948 and May 1949, when the Soviet Union lifted the blockade, the U.S. Air Force airlifted more than 1.6 million tons of supplies, flew over 172,000 sorties and logged over 530,800 flying hours in the supply effort for Berlin. 115 N Ne ev ve er r b be ef fo or re e w we er re e a ai ir rp pl la an ne es s used on such a scale and in such a tremendous logistical effort. In the Berlin airlift, the Air Force convincingly demonstrated that the unglamorous independent, indirect application of airpower could successfully meet the Soviet challenge of blockade. Not a shot was fired in this confrontation. The airlift proved itself in some ways as important and necessary to the nation as the fighter and the bomber.
Operation Vittles was more than just an airlift. As a tool of foreign policy, the airlift was, 113 
Murphy, 223. 114 Tunner, pp.152-224, and Aubrey O. Cookman Jr., "Life Line to Berlin." Popular Mechanics, February 1949, 114-121. 115 Tunner, 152-224.
Not unlike Washington's intentions ten years earlier in the Far East with B-17s, General Clay, Defense Department officials and some Washington leaders looked to airpower to deter an adversary's aggression. This time the focus was on positioning fighter groups and B-29s in Europe in order to signal to the Russians America's resolve.
As General Clay noted in a letter dated 27 June 1948 to General William H. Draper, Undersecretary of the Army who was responsible for supervising the occupation of Germany, "With respect to the augmentation of air forces, I am quite sure that this too is urgent.. . . arrival of aircraft will be deciding factor in sustaining Allied firmness." Clay urged that the movement of a fighter group scheduled to take place in August, be made immediately. He also requested that the squadron of B-29s maintained in Germany be increased to a group immediately, and, that "if available an additional group be dispatched for a prolonged visit to the British Isles." 117 The following day, in correspondence with General Omar Bradley, Army Chief of Staff, Clay outlined his feelings about the B-29s:
While LeMay had rather have the two B-29 squadrons in England rather than Germany for operational purposes, it is essential for our immediate psychological purposes that these two squadrons come to Germany first. If their presence is required for a continued stay, they can shortly be transferred to 
England. 118 116 Ibid.,
180. 117 Clay,
2:708. 118 Shlaim,
222
While the author was unable to obtain any Soviet accounts of their air mission in support of the blockade, there is evidence that the Russian air element played some role  
History, spring 1989, Vol. 36, No.1, 18.
Maintenance was another obstacle. There was a shortage of tools and spare parts in the theater. Old, worn aircraft were flown around the clock in all weather conditions. Special and scheduled maintenance was needed. Facilities were limited in USAFE, so US civilian contractors were brought over. A time schedule and flow pattern were established to handle maintenance. Once the maintenance problem was under control and more aircraft were available, a crew shortage developed. A special training school was established in Great Falls, Montana, to increase the flow of pilots. If there was a shortage of assets in theater, the industrial and military infrastructure in the United States was able to respond. In short, Tunner's drive, the skills of his subordinates, and the focused application of the United States' total military airlift assets were integrated into a cohesive operation.
Weather conditions had a two-fold effect on the airlift as the winter approached.
First, safety required a more concerted effort. Flying became more challenging as visual flight conditions gave way to instrument conditions. Second, winter brought with it an 125 Ibid., 169. increase in Berlin's needs. This translated into increased tonnage requirements. Since Berlin imported almost all its fuel, coal requirements increased significantly, placing an added demand on the airlift. State-of-the-art electronic and visual landing aids helped overcome the weather challenges. An increase in Air Traffic Control personnel was also helpful. 126
Although this work focuses primarily on the American contribution to the airlift, the British and, to a lesser degree, the French also played a role. The aircraft and ground assets of all three countries had to be efficiently controlled in Berlin in order to avoid midair collisions and to optimize the turnaround rates of aircraft on the ground at Tempelhof. The "who" and "how" of this centralized control were addressed by LeMay.
The "who" part of the equation involved the U.S. Air Force and the Royal Air Force. According to LeMay in a message to General Hoyt S. Vandenburg on 23 August 1948, ". . . operational control of all air traffic into and out of airdromes, traffic control centers, and the corridors to Berlin must be vested in one Hqs if our objective is to be attained." 127 LeMay defined operational control as ". . . the authority to regulate air traffic on and in the vicinity of air bases and along air corridors or air routes used by acft 
[aircraft]
Launius,
[16]
[17]
1. Routing of aircraft 2. Determination of altitude and distance separation 3. Determination of airdrome and approach control patterns 4. Regulation and supervision of all operational aspects 5. Responsibility for manning, equipping and maintaining facilities and service 130
Combined control over aircraft and assets involved in the airlift required serious consideration in order to realize the airlift's potential.
The Berlin airlift was a clear success. It was the first large-scale demonstration of the use of non-combat airpower in executing U.S. foreign policy. Basing the American strategy on the airlift rather than other military options reduced the risk of war by transferring to the Soviets the responsibility of choosing between escalation and defeat.
The Berlin airlift highlighted the importance of many factors required to ensure the successful use of airpower as a tool of foreign policy. Knowing and understanding the national policy objective were imperative.The objectives were to avoid war, maintain an 130 Ibid.
Allied presence in Berlin, and convey to the world our commitment in the region while negotiations were pursued to lift the blockade. Clear comprehension of these objectives enabled the USAF leaders to translate them into specific air missions. Resources were available to implement the mission: first because there was an Air Force in being; and second, because Berlin was the only major operation concerning the United States at the time. Whatever resources were not available in theater for the airlift or the demonstration of resolve could be acquired since an industrial infrastructure existed in the United States to draw upon. Organizing resources, once they were available, supported the effective and efficient implementation of the mission objectives. While weather proved a significant challenge, advances in technology that enhanced navigational capabilities and air traffic control overcame those challenges. Also, streamlining control of the airlift system between allies contributed to the airlift's success. The Berlin airlift showed the world that airpower could be used in the execution of foreign policy to deter an adversary's pursuit of dominance and change that adversary's belligerent behavior. Most importantly, the use of airpower in Berlin integrated an airlift doctrine developed in CBI, with a situation analysis driven by necessity and coupled with a 'gut' reaction, and drew upon a virtually unlimited force structure to complete the military mission successfully.
Yesterday afternoon I have been standing for awhile on the railroad station Tempelhof, watching the coming and going of the two and four motor airplanes. Everytime, when one of the big planes appeared on the western horizon and started to land there was a light in the faces of the people. Probably you can't imagine what every plane means to us . . . . Seven years later, in 1948, American political and military leaders once again coupled the use of airpower with diplomacy to pursue foreign policy. This time the focus was on Berlin, and the tension was between the Soviet Union and the West. Airpower was used in a two-pronged approach. Airlift was used to buy time while diplomacy was pursued; deployment of B-29s was used to signal US resolve. This time, the combination of diplomacy and airpower to execute foreign policy succeeded.
Why was one use of air assets in foreign policy a success and the other a failure?
This chapter compares the two cases studied, assesses the circumstances in which airpower can be an effective tool of foreign policy, and discusses major implications.
While this study is limited to two cases, it can hopefully shed some light for operational air planners, commanders, and diplomats as to how the use of airpower in foreign policy has the best chance of success. It also suggests a methodology that can be used to assess other cases in a broader study.
The framework laid out in the first chapter was developed in order to discover guidelines that may help a planner or commander make a proper decision for the employment of airpower as an instrument of foreign policy. Given these two case studies, these questions can now be examined in parallel.
In the Philippines, the United States was searching for a way to satisfy two distinct political objectives. First, America wanted to deter the Japanese from further aggression in the Far East and thus avoid war with Japan. Second, if deterrence failed, the objective was to defend the Philippines. It was hoped that deploying B-17s to the Philippines in late 1941 would achieve these ends. The overall Japanese political objective, once they determined the U.S. would not accept their expansionist agenda, was to strike U.S. bases quickly and forcefully before the Americans could muster a formidable military threat in the Far East.
During the Berlin crisis, the U.S. was determined to maintain its presence despite the land blockade. America wanted to settle the quarrel over Berlin in any manner other than direct confrontation. In order to do this, the U.S. focused its political objectives on avoiding war, deterring the Russians from further aggressive action, and providing for the safety of the Germans in the Allied sectors of Berlin. Soviet political objectives were to establish Russian dominance over Germany and to force the U.S. and its allies to discontinue their attempts to set up a western German government.
In both cases key objectives were to avoid war and deter further aggression. Crucial for the U.S.' objectives was to buy time while a solution to the dilemma was sought. A key difference was that in the Philippines the U.S. political aim was negative: convince the Japanese not to act. In Berlin, the political aim was positive: make the Russians lift the blockade. There was also a significant difference between Japanese and Soviet political objectives. The Japanese perceived expansion to the south Pacific as vital to their long-term interests and survival. The Soviet's objective was not considered vital to their survival. Another influence on the objectives was the risk of nuclear war. 
Unlike 1941
Unlike , in 1948
In the Far East, as the threat of Japanese aggression increased, the United States refocused its military strategy. The role of aircraft was key in a deterrent and defensive mission. The military objective was to create an appearance of strength through a show of bombers while the U.S. attempted to make the appearance a reality. Japan's military objective was to use all available resources to strike quickly and massively against the U.S. Their first phase of operations included an invasion of the Philippines.
In Berlin, the military objective was to use airpower to sustain the German people in the western sector and to gain time for negotiations. The Soviet military objective was to maintain the blockade of Berlin, hoping they would eventually starve the Allies out.
Using airpower to achieve the political objective in the Philippines was a case in which the means were not available to reach the ends desired. In Berlin the reverse is true: the means were available. The guidelines and directives for the military mission in Berlin were much more definitive than those for the B-17s in the Philippines. This was paritally due to the nature of the political aims. It is much easier to define a positive aim (Berlin) than a negative one (Philippines). Also, a better understanding of the adversary in 1948 contributed to successfully translating the political objective into a military one.
In the Philippines, a significant portion of the responsibility for the show of force and eventual defense of the Philippines fell on the shoulders of the B-17 force. The mission to deploy B-17s to the Philippines was given to Army Air Force Headquarters.
However, with respect to employment of the bombers as a deterrent, there was no doctrine and there was little planning. Nor was there an established doctrine for the bombers to use in defending the Philippines. Japan, on the other hand, had a definite air mission. Japanese airpower was given the responsibility of destroying defending air and naval forces on the Islands, and to provide cover for the land invasion. It achieved both.
In Berlin, the mission and employment of airpower was clear: use airlift to supply Berlin and deploy B-29s to within striking distance of Moscow as a signal of resolve. In WWII airlift doctrine was developed, and, by 1948 as a result of nuclear weapons, theories of deterrence were being developed. The Russians employed their aircraft to harass the Allies' airlift efforts.
In Berlin, the US had a positive aim, that of making the Russians terminate the blockade. The air mission in Berlin was clearly defined and had doctrine to use as a starting point for employment. In the Philippines, the U.S. objective was fundamentally different. There the aim was to convince the Japanese not to take an action. The air mission in the Philippines was not as clear as in Berlin. There was no established doctrine to use as a guideline; and, due to shortcomings in AWPD, there was little guidance in the form of a mission directive detailing how airpower fit in with the overall war plans.
Without this understanding, the U.S. had no firm estimate of what kind or how many forces it would take to deter the Japanese. This information was critical since the political aim in the Philippines was to convince the Japanese not to take action. It is also clear that American counterintelligence, denying information to the enemy, left a great deal to be desired.
A key to the success of the Berlin airlift was organizational control. Limited airspace, limited time, limited facilities and multiple players required strong organizational control to integrate all aspects of the operation. Sound organizational control produced an efficient and effective airlift.
When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor and the Philippines in December 1941, the attempt to use airpower for foreign policy failed. The Japanese were not deterred. In Berlin, airpower successfully served foreign policy. Eleven months after the Soviets imposed a land blockade they lifted it without the Allies consenting to Russian demands.
Under what circumstances can airpower be used as an effective tool of foreign policy? The two cases studied suggest that in order for airpower to be successfully employed in foreign policy, there must be a well articulated political goal that military leaders translate into a clear military objective. Once the political leaders and military leaders have completed this definition and translation function, there are several additional requisites. First, a doctrine should exist that creates a conceptual framework for the employment of airpower in the concrete situation. Doctrine provides a starting point for planning and execution. The next requirement is capabilty. Obviously, without adequate capability, even the most clearly stated mission cannot be accomplished.
Finally, planners must make an accurate assessment of the situation. This analysis is critical to integrating the objectives with the doctrine, capabilities, and the existing conditions such as weather, distance, logistics, enemy capabilities, etc. The result of a complete integration of the above criteria is an operational air plan with a good chance of success. If any of the criteria are not met, this framework suggests that the resulting air plan will have a less than optimal chance of achieving the desired foreign policy goal. This process may be best described as an input/output model:
The feedback arrow indicated above allows for adjustment during the execution There was a definite U.S. political objective in both the Philippines and in Berlin. However, the clarity with which the political objective was translated into a military objective varied greatly between the two cases. It is much more difficult to translate a negative political aim into an airpower mission than it is to translate a positive goal. In the Philippines, the broad military objective of deterrence and defense were established, but the negative political aim was never transformed into a specific airpower mission. In Berlin, military and political leadership successfully converted the positive political aim into a military objective and subsequent airpower mission.
Once the military objective is determined, it is doctrine that helps convert that objective into an air mission. Prior to World War II, there was doctrine that addressed topics such as ground support of land forces, strategic bombing, and the industrial web theory; but decision makers had practically no doctrinal guidance to employ air assets in This criterion is concerned with understanding the total political and military situation.
In 1941, U.S. political and military leadership did not understand the Japanese. These shortcomings were noted in American underestimation of Japanese capabilities, lack of operational intelligence estimates, and a misreading of the significance the Japanese placed on achieving their objectives. There was a much better understanding of the adversary in 1948. U.S. leadership fundamentally understood the Soviet mentality. In a now famous article in the July 1947 issue of Foreign Affairs, George Kennan, a senior American diplomat, noted that in diplomacy with the Russians, ". . . it [the USSR] is more sensitive to contrary force, more ready to yield on individual sectors of the diplomatic front when that force is felt to be too strong, and thus more rational in the logic and rhetoric of power." 133 The validity of this observation lay at the base of Soviet-American relations during the entire Cold War. Clearly, American understanding of its adversary was much better in 1948 than it was in 1941. This greatly aided the development of a coherent operational concept.
The conclusions of this study lead to two significant implications. First is the importance of developing an operational air plan within the context of a political goal, military objectives, doctrine, force capabilities, and strategic assessments. The proper integration of these elements increases the likelihood of an air plan that will accomplish the goals of foreign policy. Second is the concept of an Air Force in-being which can be responsive and effective when called upon to assist in foreign policy issues. These 133 X, "The Sources of Soviet Conduct," Foreign Affairs 25, no. 4 (July 1947) : 575. George Kennan later claimed authorship of this article in a footnote of his book American 
Diplomacy: 1900
-1950
(New York: New American Library, 1951), 89.
Each component of the above referenced model is necessary; and, taken together, they are sufficient for developing a sound air plan. An understanding of the political objective by the military planners is of prime importance. This suggests that military planners and decision makers should be educated in the national application of aerospace power. Such an education will encourage military leaders to develop their own views about the political effectiveness of military strategies, an important ingredient to the model. The need to evaluate competing alternatives for the use of air assets to further foreign policy goals is a key ingredient of this education. For the past 40 years, these debates and alternatives have focused on nuclear strategies. It is time to enlarge that focus to include conventional operations as well. There must also be a forum in which political leaders are familiarized with military procedures and capabilities. As many of our political leaders today have no military background, such a forum may be pivotal in cultivating the close relationship needed between political and military leaders to ensure complete and correct communication of objectives.
Clearly, the two cases presented in this paper highlight the importance of having a doctrine from which to begin operational planning. The Berlin case suggests that having a doctrine is the foundation upon which to build and provide direction for an air plan. It also saves valuable time, which in turn may buy the even more critical time needed to conduct foreign policy or build up forces if confrontation is imminent. Keeping in mind the dynamic nature of the military environment, airpower doctrine should be developed that reflects a balance of current influencing factors. In the late 1940's, the chief influencing factor was the new existence of nuclear weapons, which spawned intensive discussions of nuclear doctrine. There was little balance however, as airpower doctrine for the employment of conventional weapons was all but ignored. Today we must avoid the same mistake if we are to have successful air plans for our dynamic environment. Doctrine should not focus solely on the conventional use of force. Doctrine must also address the use of airpower as a tool of diplomacy.
Of course, even the most well developed and balanced doctrine is of little value without the capability to execute it. This suggests the question, "What constitutes airpower capabilties?" The answer is not always 'bombs and bullets'. It may be airlift, it may be satellite capability, or it may be a nonlethal application of airpower. As technology advances, our capabilities broaden and so must our thoughts on the use of airpower. Developing a wide range of aerospace capabilities is central to the use of airpower as a diplomatic tool.
Finally, this paper has shown that a cogent and comprehensive situation analysis is a necessary condition for the successful use of airpower as an instrument of foreign policy. This analysis determines what action will have the highest likelihood of success in light of a host of complex situation-specific relationships. In order to obtain such an analysis, we need military members who are educated in strategic assessment; can synthesize material from subject matter experts; and can integrate political, social, and cultural understanding with their military expertise. This implies that air leaders of today and tomorrow cannot be the product of a stovepipe institution that focuses simply on the narrow employment of their specialties. We live in a global environment in which traditional institutional boundaries are becoming fuzzy. In order to get the best situation analysis, our focus must venture outside these boundaries.
Since today America is in a period of military and fiscal retrenchment, a final focus on air force capabilities is appropriate. One way to keep our Air Force in a position of strength, despite the force structure drawdowns and weakening of our industrial base, is to pursue the theory of an Air Force-in-being. 134
Given that political leaders have determined that airpower may be useful in achieving a political objective, it is the responsibility of the air planner to determine how to do this with the capability available. The objective of an Air Force-in-being is to have airpower, as an extension of foreign policy, prevent an adversary from securing positive political goals inimical to the vital interests of the U.S. The term, "Air Force-in-being"
does not imply simply keeping the Air Force in existence; it implies an Air Force that vigorously pursues positive activity. For foreign policy issues this means continual deployment and concentration of air forces in highly visible areas around the globe, much as naval fleets were deployed in the nineteenth century to "show the flag". Indeed, airpower is never more operative for foreign policy matters than when it is perceived to exist, but is not brandished. An Air Force-in-being, while defensive in nature, espouses an opportunistic spirit.
This spirit leads to a second point: denying a belligerent control of an area he regards necessary to pursue his political objective. Using aerospace assets defensively and seizing every opportunity for a counterstroke can prevent an adversary from achieving the command of the area it desires. Examples of such activity are: 1)
134 The discussion that follows concerning an Air Force-in-being parallels in many way Julian Corbett's discussion of a fleet in-being in Some Principles of Maritime Strategy 
(Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1988), pp.209-232.
Finally, the recognition by the belligerent of an Air Force-in-being may prevent him from acting, knowing there will be risk and hazard involved if he does. If nothing else, the Air Force in-being may force the adversary to maintain a continual guard, which would draw on resources he might otherwise use in direct pursuit of his objectives.
This study concludes that for airpower to be an effective tool of foreign policy, air planners must first translate a foreign policy goal into a military objective. There should be doctrine to guide the plan, capability to implement the plan, and a broad situation analysis of the environment in which the plan will be executed. If all these criteria are met, experience of the Berlin blockade suggests that airpower can be an effective tool of foreign policy. Where these conditions are not met, the Philippine experience points to the likelihood of failure. The study also suggests that the U.S. can exploit its aerospace dominance in the 21st century much as Great Britain employed its naval dominance in the 18th and 19th centuries. The "Air Force-in-Being" is a conceptual device that should be actively employed by our national leadersip and our senior air planners to achieve maximum value from our extant aerospace capabilities.
(USAFFE). On October 3, 1941, at MacArthur's request, Major General Lewis H.
better than none at all. 41 Ibid. 42 Larry I. Bland, ed., The Papers of George Catlett Marshall, Vol.2 (Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press, 1986), 676-679. 43 AWPD Staff Meeting Notes, December 4, 1941, 1.HRA file #145.96-220.
______
forces strength, there existed a possibility that the American shortcomings may not have been a liability in signaling determination. However, the Japanese had spies throughout the Philippines. General Brereton noted, "Japanese espionage was a constant thorn in our side. They had agents everywhere." First Lieutenant Walter Putman, the commanding officer of the Headquarters Squadron, 24th Pursuit Group, STATED THAT THE
forces strength, there existed a possibility that the American shortcomings may not have been a liability in signaling determination. However, the Japanese had spies throughout the Philippines. General Brereton noted, "Japanese espionage was a constant thorn in our side. They had agents everywhere." First Lieutenant Walter Putman, the commanding officer of the Headquarters Squadron, 24th Pursuit Group, STATED THAT THE
Germans to think the U.S. was pulling out of Europe; would weaken the resistance to communism in Western Europe and " . . . would in short, knock the props from under American foreign policy everywhere." 84 The next morning, Defense officials, Secretaries Marshall, Forestall, and Royall, sought presidential approval to feed Berlin through an airlift. 85 By the next day, 39 C-54's were on their way to Germany. 86 Simultaneous to the decisions made in Washington, General Lucius D. Clay, Military Governor of Germany, also considered the use of airlift. 87 This first step was considered a stopgap until high level diplomacy could lift the blockade. According to Marshall, [The] United States was willing to settle the Berlin quarrel by negotiation, objectives was tense and uncertain. President Truman and Secretary Marshall feared provoking the Soviets and escalating the crisis into a third world war. In essence, Truman and Marshall declared the likelihood of the interdependence between Russia's crisis behavior and that of the United States. In contrast, Clay disagreed with the concept of interdependence between Russia's behavior and America's. Clay believed that Russia decided before the crisis whether or not it would go to war over the Berlin issue. The Soviet decision, thought Clay, was against war. 95 In a conversation between Secretary Royall and Clay on 25 June 1948, Clay expressed the following: U.S.S.R. On July 3, Clay and other Western military representatives drove to Marshall Sokolovsky's headquarters near Potsdam. The Western authorities told Sokolovsky they were anxious for an agreement to end the blockade. Sokolovsky made it clear that the blockade would remain in place until plans for a West German government were abandoned. 98 The linkage was clear: the Soviet military objective was to isolate West The Truman administration accepted the airlift proposal. Airlift avoided a direct provocation of war; and, in Truman's opinion, airlift would serve to stretch stockpiles of rations in Berlin and gain time for negotiations. 101 Clay needed air assets, so he telephoned Lt.Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, Commander of U.S. Air Forces Europe, to request air support for the airlift. CLAY : Have you got any planes there that can carry coal? LEMAY : Carry what? CLAY : Coal. LEMAY : The long-distance connection must be bad. It sounds as if you are asking whether we have any planes for carrying coal. CLAY : Yes, that's what I said -coal.
Major Janet A. Therianos
US Air Force Academy
Louisianna Technical University
Farichild Air Force Base (AFB)
Washington
KC-10s at Barksdale AFB, Louisianna
Chief of KC-10 Operations for Fifteenth Air Force
Air Command
Staff College
School of Advanced Airpower Studies
Major Therianos
Air Combat Command Headquarters, Langley AFB
Va. She
Captain Jim D. Wallace
USMC
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
In January 1941, there were three major military airfields in the Philippines, Clark Field, about 60 miles north of Manila, and Nielson and Nichols Fields on the outskirts of Manila. Since the airfields were so short in length they were extended during 1941. This was a slow process; and because of the shortage of suitable fields, some were used while under construction. By December 1941, four more airfields were in use: Iba, Rosales, Del Carmen, and Del Monte Fields. (Del Monte Field was on Mindanao.) One of the reasons Brereton was selected to assume command of the Far East Air Forces was because of the ". . . fact that the buildup of the Far East Air Force in its early stages would be largely one of preparing services and facilities. Airplanes, airfields, pilots and all the things needed to run an air force were practically nonexistent in the Philippines . . . ." Brereton was one of the few AAF generals who had a supply, maintenance, and tactical background. 64 In his diary, Brereton draws a clear picture of the state of affairs with respect to implementing General MacArthur's plans for preparing the FEAAF. . . . there was neither equipment nor money nor manpower organized and available for the immediate 100-percent implementation of the program required. It was a question of improvisation all along the line. 65
Of the seven fields available by December of 1941, only Clark and Del Monte were considered usable for bombers. Del Monte field in fact had no facilities, only an airstrip. 66 The fields provided did not allow for sufficient dispersion, nor for adequate mobility. This concerned Brereton. 67 
64 Brereton,
5. 65 Ibid.,
20. 66 Ibid.,
21. _ Pearl Harbor Attack Hearings,
part 11,
[5322]
[5323]
The mission of the Airlift Task Force was "to provide airlift to Berlin and such other places as may be directed by the Commanding General, USAFE." 122 With this directive, General Tunner set up airlift headquarters in the only facility placed at his disposal: a run-down apartment house in Wiesbaden, Germany. The one thing Tunner did have was his orders from General LeMay, "I expect you to produce." In short time, Tunner's Airlift Task Force was organized into eight major functional divisions. These were personnel, communications, airfields, plans, supply, maintenance, cargo handling, and operations. Within the operations division were the weather, and navigation specialties. Each of the functional divisions was lead by officers whom General Tunner hand-picked. 123
Once the headquarters was established, General Tunner and his staff set out to assess the airlift. "My first over-all impression was that the situation was just what I had anticipated--a real cowboy operation. . . . Everything was temporary. . . . Confusion everywhere." 124 More planes were needed, and air space was limited, as was ground 122 Letter from General LeMay to General Tunner, 30 Jul 1948, "Subject: Instructions to Commander, Airlift Task Force (Provisional)," 1, HRA file #168. 
[163]
[164]
[165]
[166]
[167]
167
A myriad of conditions influence the application of airpower in any situation. It has been the goal of this paper to single out the most significant conditions influencing the two case studies presented. These conditions are laid out side by side and then analyzed individually. Although each case includes one condition singularly significant to that case, all of the following conditions bear a major influence on their respective situations:
Resources had the most significant influence on the employment of airpower in both case studies. In both the Philippines and Berlin, there was an initial shortage of aircraft, support equipment, airfields, maintenance facilities, and personnel. In Berlin these shortcomings were quickly remedied. In the Philippines they never were. In October 1941 the U.S did not have the industrial infrastructure to meet the demands of deploying large numbers of aircraft and support equipment to the Philippines. Although industry had been increasing production of war materials, the capability did not exist to build up the defenses of the Philippines quicky. Given the difference in military balance between the Japanese and the Americans, the U.S. did not have enough time to install a force strong enough to deter the Japanese. Contrary to this, in 1948, the U.S. was on a much stronger foundation. Even though the country was demobilizing forces after World War II, there was a large reserve upon which to draw. In time critical situations, as both cases were, success pivots on the ability to employ forces rapidly. This ability allowed American decision makers to act from a position of strength in 1948. In 1941 they hoped to fool the Japanese into thinking the U.S. was acting from a position of strength, when in fact it was not.
In both the Philippines and Berlin, weather posed an uncontrollable impediment to the expeditious deployment and employment of airpower. For some weather conditions the only avenue to pursue was to sit and wait out the storm, losing precious time. However, by 1948 improvements in technology that had enhanced navigational aids and visual landing aids helped overcome some of the friction caused by the weather.
Distances involved played different roles for each case studied. It was significant in both cases because the distance required to travel influenced response time. It also influenced, to a degree, the amount of credibility of the air threat. In the Far East situation, the distance between the United States and the Philippines was approximately ten thousand miles. This meant it would take a number of days, maybe even weeks, before B-17s could reach the Philippines. The distance between Manila and Japan was approximately two thousand miles. This distance was too far for a round trip mission in the B-17 which was limited to three thousand miles. However, the Japanese had air forces stationed in Formosa, two hundred miles north of the Philippines, a distance their extended range fighters could handle. Distances involved in the Far East may have precluded the U.S. from establishing a credible air threat. In Europe geography was more compact. From the U.S. to Europe the distance was half that required to the Far East.
This meant response time was cut in half also. Additionally, from Germany to Moscow the distance is about one thousand miles, putting Moscow well within range of B-29s.
Intelligence was critical in Far East strategy. Shortcomings existed in the Army Air Forces' gathering and analysis of information. This influenced the American understanding of Japanese capabilities and intentions. Poor intelligence also made it impossible for the U.S. to know how the Japanese perceived their military strength.
Articles:
Office 