# ID: fe592437f41643ae96619ff955030b3d
# Title: Airpower as a Tool of Foreign Policy Two Case Studies of Airpower 's Use: The Philippines in 1941 and Berlin in 1948
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1993.0
# Fulltext:
Germans to think the U.S. was pulling out of Europe; would weaken the resistance to communism in Western Europe and " . . .
would in short, knock the props from under American foreign policy everywhere."
84 The next morning, Defense officials, Secretaries Marshall, Forestall, and Royall, sought presidential approval to feed Berlin through an airlift.
85 By the next day, 39 C-54's were on their way to Germany.
86 Simultaneous to the decisions made in Washington, General Lucius D. Clay, Military Governor of Germany, also considered the use of airlift.
87 This first step was considered a stopgap until high level diplomacy could lift the blockade.
According to Marshall, [The] United States was willing to settle the Berlin quarrel by negotiation, objectives was tense and uncertain.
President Truman and Secretary Marshall feared provoking the Soviets and escalating the crisis into a third world war.
In essence, Truman and Marshall declared the likelihood of the interdependence between Russia's crisis behavior and that of the United States.
In contrast, Clay disagreed with the concept of interdependence between Russia's behavior and America's.
Clay believed that Russia decided before the crisis whether or not it would go to war over the Berlin issue.
The Soviet decision, thought Clay, was against war.
95 In a conversation between Secretary Royall and Clay on 25 June 1948, Clay expressed the following: U.S.S.R. On July 3, Clay and other Western military representatives drove to Marshall Sokolovsky's headquarters near Potsdam.
The Western authorities told Sokolovsky they were anxious for an agreement to end the blockade.
Sokolovsky made it clear that the blockade would remain in place until plans for a West German government were abandoned.
98 The linkage was clear: the Soviet military objective was to isolate West The Truman administration accepted the airlift proposal.
Airlift avoided a direct provocation of war; and, in Truman's opinion, airlift would serve to stretch stockpiles of rations in Berlin and gain time for negotiations.
101 Clay needed air assets, so he telephoned Lt.
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, Commander of U.S. Air Forces Europe, to request air support for the airlift.
CLAY : Have you got any planes there that can carry coal?
LEMAY : Carry what?
CLAY : Coal.
LEMAY : The long-distance connection must be bad.
It sounds as if you are asking whether we have any planes for carrying coal.
CLAY : Yes, that's what I said -coal.