# ID: fe6741b3e8e94cb5823174cfece4b1e2
# Title: Command and Control: US Army Staffs and the Operations Process
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2016.0
# Fulltext:
The analysis of US First Army staff during World War II demonstrates how a staff effectively supports the commander in commanding and controlling large formations. Staffs and their organization have developed and adapted to the changes and growth in warfare over time. Since its beginnings, foreign thought, often French and Prussian, heavily influenced the US Army's doctrine of staff organization and operations. One can trace our modern
I started this project desiring to better understand how staffs work. Historians and writers have described the actions of the great captains and commanders throughout history, but have comparatively written much less on the actions of the staff officers assisting them. Researching and writing this monograph has increased my understanding of the evolution of staff organizations, and how army and corps staffs can assist their subordinate commanders, staffs, and units. I want to thank both Dr. Mark T. Calhoun and Dr. Peter J. Schifferle for supporting my curiosity and helping guide me thru this process. I am a much better officer and writer thanks to them. I would like to thank my seminar, the Niners, and seminar leader, Colonel James W. Wright, for continuously challenging and supporting me through this past year. They created one of the most open and enriching environments to learn and I am a much better officer because of them. Finally, I want to thank my wife, Allison, and our children-MacKenzie, Bree, and Welles. Thank you for your patience, support, and reminders to find balance. I am a better man because of you. 
All organizations are made up of human beings and that a sympathetic understanding of their personalities and abilities-and indeed their weaknesses-is essential to continuing smoothness in operations.
-Dwight D. Eisenhower, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, Vol 3.
As far back as the ancient Macedonians, leaders relied on assistants to help prepare and control their forces in battle. These were the early beginnings of modern staffs. As the armies became larger and the distances fought over greater, these staffs became more formalized and complex. Without staffs, the commanders would not be able to command and control their armies. Many histories highlight the actions of the great military commanders, but often fail to describe how staffs assisted the commanders in achieving success or failure. These oversights beg the question of how successful staffs assist their commander.
According to current US Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP), 6-0 Mission Command, the staff "supports the commander and subordinate commanders in understanding situations, decision making, and implementing decisions throughout the conduct of operations." 
1
The commander drives the operations process by understanding, visualizing, describing, directing, leading, and assessing throughout operations. In helping to understand the situation, the staff is assisting the commander in the first three tasks of understanding, visualizing and describing. As commanders and staffs encounter the world's growing complexity, the difficulty of creating that shared understanding increases. 
2
of the parts and variables of the problem simultaneously. 
3
While doctrine has spelled out this role of staffs since the advent of the operations process, and history bears out their success in accomplishing the associated tasks, one wonders how some staffs achieve success in this role while others do not? Historical analysis of successful US Army staffs in World War I and World War II reveal that they did so largely based on their proficiency in four key components of their staff functions (what the US Army now calls the operations process). Staffs must possess a common understanding of doctrine and staff processes. Militaries have most effectively created that understanding by developing a professional education system that instills these traits into the staff officer. Staff officers themselves must develop and maintain proficiency at their assigned duties and exercise disciplined initiative in carrying them out. An effective staff requires a strong chief of staff or executive officer to coordinate staff activities, enabling the staff to operate and the commander to command. Finally, staffs must work well and cooperate within the staff, but also outside the staff with higher, adjacent, and subordinate staffs and units. 
4
The origins of military staffs and their evolution over the centuries provides context within which one can understand the roles and duties of modern staff officers. As changes in the nature of warfare caused battles to increase in scale, including the number of combat forces, the length of campaigns, and the size of battlefields, military commanders increasingly relied on others to assist them in controlling their forces.
Additionally, as technology and processes became more complex, armies sought the advice of technical experts to help them adapt to changes in technology and use new weapon systems effectively.
Ancient western civilizations provide the first examples of early staff officers.
Mainly technical experts in logistics and engineering, these proto-staff officers enabled both the Egyptian and Assyrian empires to conquer many of their neighboring states. To extend the reach of their empire building conquests over large distances, the Persians and the Macedonians further developed staff organization and operations. In 511 BC, the Persian emperor Darius formalized the roles of his intelligence officers, administrative and logistics officers, and engineers.
5
6
7
8
Officers became more specialized in the employment of the increasingly complex artillery, and the increased sustainment requirements required better logisticians and administrators. Additionally, the birth of firearms changed how armies were organized and fought, resulting in armies becoming further spread out. This increased the difficulties in command and further required commanders to rely on assistants to help control their armies.  
, 1953), 17-18, 36;
Gat, 3, 8-11;
Gilbert, 22-23, 27;
J. D. Hittle, 30;
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Art of War, trans. Neal Wood (Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 2001), ix, xx-xxvi, xxxviii-xlvii;
N. P. Milney, trans. Vegetius: Epitome of Military Science (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1996), xiii-xiv, xlii-xliii. 10 J. D. Hittle, 37-46.
11
12
13
14
Additionally, he advocated organizing the staff into four general staff sections, similar to the organization of modern US Army staffs. Soon after, in 1800, Paul Thiebault published the first manual on staff organizations and operations, Manuel des Adjutants Generaux et des Adjoints Employes dans les Etats-Majors Divisionaires des Armees. 
15
15
Early US Army staffs were not as well organized and structured as their European counterparts. The early Continental Army's staff was a representation of the Continental Army itself, composed of various officers with a wide variety of staff experience and training from different military systems. It was not until George Washington selected the Prussian Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben to serve as the army's Inspector General that the staff became organized and efficient. Before coming to America, Steuben served in Frederick the Great's Prussian Army, serving on various staffs during the Seven Years War. Following that war, Steuben was one of the first officers selected for Frederick's new school to train officers on modern military theory. 
16
Throughout the remainder of the war, Steuben served Washington in a variety of roles, carrying out duties that resembled those of officers serving in each of the four main staff sections. These duties included producing staff estimates and general orders for Washington that helped him win the war.
During the century following the Revolutionary War, the US Army made few effective advances to staff organization and operations, despite congress' acts forming the American General Staff in 1796 and establishing the United States Military Academy in 1802. Both the Union and Confederate armies organized their staffs for the American Civil War using the same Army Regulations of 1861; few differences existed between the staffs of the Continental Army and those of the Civil War. 
17
The 1917 FSR described separation of the staff into a general staff group and a technical and administrative group. The general staff group consisted of three subdivisions: a combat section, an administrative section, and an intelligence section. 
19
New York University Press, 2012), 175-77, 187-88; J. D. Hittle, 196-210; David W.  Hogan, Command Post at War: First Army Headquarters in Europe, 1943-1945  (Washington, DC: United States Army Center of Military History, 2000), 3; Matheny, 20.
19 United States War Department, Field Service Regulations (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1917), 131. The combat section-much like the modern US Army's G-3 Operations and G-5 Plans sections-dealt with "orders, movements and disposition of the forces; combats, detachments; war diaries." The administrative section oversaw the functions of today's G-1 and G-4: "organization, losses, reinforcements, police and discipline; questions of supplies of all kinds; signal and telegraph service; evacuation and care of the sick or wounded; relations with lines of communication and all general correspondence." The intelligence section, functioned like the modern G-2, but also handled G-9 civil affairs tasks: "the movements and dispositions of the enemy, including exploration, reconnaissance, and the gathering and distribution of information; . . . relations with the civil authorities of the occupied territory." Orders. FM 101-5 provided the doctrinal foundation for US Army staffs throughout WWII with only minor changes. 
22
23
24
On February 25, 1944, the staff published Army Plan Neptune. To enable further concurrent, detailed planning, the First Army distributed copies to higher, adjacent, and subordinate units. In its published operations plan, First Army's mission was to "launch a As the planning for the invasions continued and staff personnel identified new requirements, the staff continued to grow. To address these new requirements and continue conducting the operations process, the First Army created new staff sections while expanding existing sections. 
32
33
34
Multiple exercises led to the identification of changes needed in the staff structure and operations processes. Two command post exercises in December 1943 and January 1944 revealed that the doctrinal division of the staff into forward and rear 
32 Hogan,
59
33
34
From 27 to 28 April, exercise Tiger tested the VII Corps assault plan under the most realistic conditions possible. V Corps followed closely behind from 3 to 8 May with exercise Fabius. Although identifying a need for better traffic control during the embarkation phase, these exercises went smoothly and the units made no major changes to the existing plan. 
36
In the early hours of June 6, the invasion began. First Army's G-2 and G-3 sections monitored the battle from the operations center aboard the Achernar. Communications were poor with both the units ashore, other ships, and the rear echelons in Britain. To overcome this, the staff relied on monitoring five separate nets and establishing their own command net with the corps headquarters and the two command posts aboard the Augusta and Achernar. 
37
38
While the Corps had established their command posts on shore the evening of June 6, First Army began establishing its command post ashore on June 9. By June 10, Bradley was ashore with his staff from the Augusta, while Hodges and the remainder of the forward staff disembarked on June 11. To assist the corps' operations, the staff immediately relieved the corps of the responsibility and began resolving the delays in buildup of forces at Omaha beach. 
39
40
The G-2, Dickson, created a target subsection to assist the collation and transmission of intelligence on the large number of artillery, air, and other targets.
Additionally, the G-2 section collected and analyzed reports from all the subordinate units, prisoner interrogations, and reconnaissance assets. It then published summaries to subordinate, adjacent, and lower units to inform them of their analysis three times a day. Dickson would also prepare special estimates as required for sensitive or critical To relieve the corps staffs of the buildup responsibilities at the beachheads, First Army established the corps rear boundaries and assumed direct control over the service troops on June 13. The G-4 immediately began establishing supply dumps, truck heads, and hospitals for both the corps and army rear area, allowing the corps to push further forward. Each of the special staff sections established their own control systems, which informed the G-4 daily on collected stock status and evacuation numbers. Additionally, the principal special staff officers met daily to coordinate their activities and receive guidance from the G-4. 
43
42
Cherbourg. Cherbourg and its port became even more critical to sustain the small Allied foothold. 
44
Understanding the criticality of the port and the affect the storm had on existing supplies, Collins urged his units to attack vigorously during VII Corps' attack on 21 June. First Army staff coordinated with both the Ninth Air Force and the Navy to provide support to VII Corps attack. After five additional days of hard fighting, VII Corps captured the German commander, General von Schlieben, and taken Cherbourg. Unfortunately, VII Corps was not able to prevent the Germans from destroying most of the port facilities before they seized them. Instead of the planned three days to become operational, it took the Allies three weeks before the port became operational at all, and months before it reached its full capacity. With the capture of Cherbourg, First Army accomplished the overall objective of Operation Neptune. Now it could completely turned its attention to breaking out of the peninsula. 
45
Leading up to and during Operation Neptune, the First Army staff successfully conducted the operations process. Three areas deserve highlighting: the initial planning 
44
45
They assisted subordinate commanders, staffs, and units, and informed units and organizations outside the headquarters. Additionally, the First Army staff officers were adaptable and flexible in solving problems throughout the operation.
Beginning with the initial planning, the First Army staff established its forward planning group and collocated with the 21st Army Group in London. After First Army published and briefed the operations plan for Neptune, they provided liaisons to their subordinate corps to assist planning and modifying the First Army's plan as required.
The colocation of the planning groups of the army group, army, and corps facilitated communication and assisted collaborative planning. Without this close coordination and communication, the amphibious assault would have involved a much greater degree of risk.
Once the assault began, the staff received and provided reports to both the army group and the corps. These reports provided situational understanding to higher headquarters, and enabled communication between the two separated corps until the linkup at Carentan. Once on shore, the First Army staff continued close coordination with the air force, navy, and services of supply to facilitate beachhead operations. Once the corps established large enough beachheads, the First Army staff established the corps rear areas. This freed the corps staffs to focus on fighting the fight while the army staff focused on building up the follow on forces and supplies needed to sustain the assault. This coordination was especially necessary after the storm destroyed much of the artificial harbor and the equipment and supplies on shore. The corps staffs would likely intelligence to air, naval, and ground fire. Additionally, the entire staff worked together to establish a board to determine the affects the 19 June storm had on First Army operations. In each case, the First Army staff was willing to reorganize itself to overcome the identified problems. They were not rigid in their organization structure.
The First Army staff's strength during Operation Neptune came from its close communication and coordination with subordinate and adjacent units, and its adaptability and flexibility in organizational structure. These attributes and actions supported Bradley and set the conditions for a successful operation.
Once First Army captured Cherbourg and established a line of communication to sustain Allied operations, it turned its attention to breaking out of the peninsula into Brittany. Eisenhower understood his forces must break out of the complex terrain in Normandy and get into more open terrain before the Germans could seal the Allies on the peninsula in stabilized, attritional warfare. This put the Allied high command under pressure to provide much needed supplies for Allied units in Normandy, while also providing support units and ships to enable Operation Anvil, the planned amphibious assault on southern France. 
46
47
48
Bradley understood that the Allies relied on firepower and mobility to make best use of their military strength. In order to conduct a war of fire and movement, the Allies needed to break through the German line and begin operating against the German flank and rear areas. 
49
50
51
52
The First Army staff conducted the bulk of the planning for Operation Neptune, but given the increasingly desperate nature of the situation Bradley developed the foundations of the next breakout plan himself. Spending two nights hovering over map 
49
50 Blumenson,
[37]
[38]
Bradley,
319,
325;
Hogan,
[90]
[91]
53
To further improve the concept for Operation Cobra, Bradley brought in his corps commanders and Major General Elwood R. "Pete" Quesada, commander of IX Tactical Air Force. During this conference, Bradley described using the air strike to allow the ground forces to penetrate the strong but thin German defensive line, moving into the high prairie of central France. There the terrain favored the mobile war that Bradley and the Allies sought. Bradley continually stressed the importance of moving boldly in order to achieve the breakthrough. 
54
Atkinson, 139;
Bradley, 329, Hogan, 104. 54 Bradley, 332;
Hogan, 104;
Thomas Alexander Hughes, Overlord: General Pete Quesada and the Triumph of Tactical Air Power in World War II (New York: The Free Press, 1995)
55 Blumenson,
188;
Bradley,
330.
58
60
61
First Army originally planned to begin Operation Cobra on July 21, but poor weather forced Bradley to postpone the attack until July 24. 
62
63
62 Bradley, 343;
Blumenson, 210;
D'Este, 400;
Headquarters, VII Corps Report After Action Against the Enemy 1-31 July, 1944
(US VII Corps, 9 August 1944), 20;
Hogan, 106;
Hughes, 201;
Weigley, 152. 63 Atkinson, 142;
Bradley, 346-47;
Blumenson, 231-33;
Headquarters, VII Corps, Report After Action, 27;
Hogan, 107;
Hughes, 207-9;
Sylvan, 67-69;
Weigley, 152-53.
64
65
64 Bradley,
348;
Blumenson,
233. 65 Atkinson,
Bradley,
Blumenson,
236;
Calhoun,
D'Este,
401;
Headquarters,
VII Corps,
Report After Action,
[29]
[30]
Hogan,
107;
Hughes,
Sylvan,
70.
66
67
66 Atkinson,
Bradley,
358;
Blumenson,
240,
D'Este,
Headquarters,
VII Corps,
Report After Action,
[28]
[29]
[30]
Hogan,
110;
Hughes,
219;
Weigley,
155.
68
69
Once Bradley developed the broad concept of the operation and picked VII Corps as the main effort, the First Army staff worked closely with VII Corps and IX Tactical Air Force staffs in order to develop a detailed plan. The combined and parallel planning between First Army staff and VII Corps staff for Operation Cobra differed from the planning for Operation Neptune. Previously, First Army issued a detailed plan to VII 
68 Blumenson,
287;
Hogan,
110.
One of the most successful things that emerged from this combined and parallel planning was the effective use of tactical air cover to support the exploitation forces.
Showing adaptability and flexibility again, First Army created a new subsection, the joint air operations section. This section consolidated, reviewed, and assigned all air support requests to the supporting command, IX Tactical Air Force. Additionally, IX Tactical Air Force provided air support teams that moved with the armored forces, providing direct communication with the aircraft providing the support. By installing additional radios in the tanks, the crews of both the tanks and the aircraft could maintain close coordination while advancing rapidly.
The lack of coordination between the First Army and Eight Air Force staffs stands in stark contrast to the effective relationship First Army established with the IX Tactical Air Force. If the staffs would have communicated, the First Army staff could have identified that Eighth Air Force staff had planned the approach to travel perpendicular rather than parallel. The staff could then have recommended to Bradley additional safety measures or change in distances to protect against friendly casualties. Instead, First Army continued to place their forces as far forward as possible on the false assumption that the aircraft would be coming in from another direction.
As during Operation Neptune, the First Army staff continued to adapt and be flexible in its structuring. It did not do as well in communicating with units and organizations outside the headquarters, specifically those that were not co-located in their area of responsibility. With Bradley taking few members of the staff with him to 12th Army Group, the staff remained intact to face the months of fighting ahead of them with ample opportunity to continue refining staff processes and improve their effectiveness.
Seven months after Operation Cobra's successful breakout, by March 1945 the Allies had used fire and movement to push the Germans to the western borders of Germany, eliminating many of their best units along the way, while suffering many casualties of their own. Many of the Allied senior leaders viewed crossing the Rhine as a task that could prove as difficult and costly as the cross-channel attack. 
70
71
In the seven months since Hodges assumed command of First Army, the command climate of First Army had slowly changed. While as a deputy commander, Hodges spent much of his time visiting subordinate corps and divisions. Once in command, he spent less and less time visiting his subordinate units. Kean, the chief of staff, assumed more responsibility for technical matters and spent less time focused on administrative tasks. This created even more friction amongst the other primary staff officers, particularly the G-2 and G-3. Additionally, continuous fighting had worn down the staff, many of whom had been working together since the operations in the Mediterranean. The stress was beginning to show. 
73
74
75
74 Hogan,
MacDonald,
221;
Weigley,
618. 75 Hogan,
Ruppenthal,
79
78 Hogan, 249;
MacDonald, 194, 196;
First US Army Report of Operations 23 February -8 May 1945, 21. 79 Atkinson, 548-53;
Bradley, 510-11;
Hogan, 251;
First US Army Report of Operations 23 February -8 May 1945, 24;
MacDonald, 219-20;
Sylvan, 324-25;
Weigley, 626-28.
80 Bradley,
506;
Hogan,
249;
Sylvan,
325.
Additionally, the First Army staff distributed innovations developed in one unit across the entire army. The Rhino remains perhaps the best-known example, but the staff shared numerous other innovations in materiel and tactics. During Operation Lumberjack, the First Army staff assisted its subordinate corps by controlling the physical space in which the corps operated. By shifting boundaries, the staff optimized each corps' area of operations and the tasks for which each corps retained responsibility, allowing them to focus on the most critical tasks at critical times. Throughout all the case studies, First Army staff officers remained adaptable and flexible-for example, in their ability to optimize their organizational structure. As they identified new requirements or problems, the staff created new subsections multiple times. Prior to Operation Neptune, the First Army created planning groups to conduct joint planning with higher headquarters, and created new sections, like armor section, to advise the commander on unique and special capabilities. During the execution of Operation Neptune, the First Army staff continued to create new sections to manage the beachhead and control supplies and transportation issues. The G-2 also created a new subsection to collect, to consolidate, and to distribute intelligence to air, naval, and ground fire support organizations. During Operation Cobra, the creation of the joint air operations section greatly facilitated air-ground coordination and the provision of tanks to the IX Tactical Air Force enabled air support teams to maintain communication with the lead elements of the armored exploitation forces. The simple changes in boundaries reveal the staff's flexibility, enabling it to change the plan as opportunities presented themselves. This allowed the subordinate corps to take advantage of opportunities and maintain the tempo of the offensive.
Finally, there was little evidence that directly supported the need for a strong chief of staff to coordinate the staff. This does not refute the requirement for a strong chief of staff, but highlights the need for staff officers not just to keep records of the products they produced, but also keep accounts of how they produced them, primarily who they communicated with, and how, during various staff actions. Historians and current staff officers could study those records and learn how to better develop and lead staffs in the future.
First Army staff assisted Bradley and then Hodges by communicating effectively.
Effective communication separates staffs that assist the commander and those that do not. The evidence showed that First Army's staff officers communicated amongst themselves, while also communicating with units and organizations outside the headquarters, creating shared understanding within the staff and with other headquarters and units. Effective staffs also assist the commander by assisting subordinate commanders, staffs, and units. This reduces the number of problems for the commander and provides time and space for the commander to focus on truly important decisions. Staff organization and structures can greatly assist how the staffs communicate within and outside themselves.
Staff officers at higher-level headquarters often struggle with identifying the role and 'fight' of their headquarters. The case studies show that in addition to resourcing their subordinate units, simple control measures like changing boundaries, priorities, and task organizations enable and assist their subordinate units in accomplishing their missions. Staff officers should increase their understanding and purpose of these control measures during planning and directing operations.
Historians tend to focus more on commanders' actions than staff actions in most histories. This probably has much to do with interest in the great captains of military history, who overshadow the staff officers that help make those great captains successful by working in nameless, faceless obscurity. This also limits the US Army's ability to learn how to improve staff functions by studying historical accounts of army operations. Staff officers should therefore keep a record not just of the final products they produce, but also their actions in creating those orders and briefings-primarily who 53 they communicated with, and how, during various staff actions. The preparation of operational and unit histories in the modern era often has the character of a task to perform-usually in a hasty and only marginally useful manner. Staffs should refer to operational histories and the accounts of staffs in previous US Army conflicts to identify the most useful information they contain. This will provide a guide for modern staffs to increase the amount of evidence they record, enabling better analysis of how staffs effectively assist commanders not only in after action reviews, but over longer periods of time as military historians continue to study the past to gain hints of what the future might hold.
Army Doctrine Reference Publication (ADRP) 6-0, Mission Command (Washington, DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army,
2012), 3-5.
Richard K. Betts, "Is Strategy an Illusion?" International Security 25, no. 2 (Fall,  2000): 34.
Field Manual (FM) 6-0, Commander and Staff Organization and Operations (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2015), 2-1-2-2.
J. D.Hittle, 13-19; R. Ernest Dupuy and Trevor N. Dupuy, The Harper  Encyclopedia of Military History (New York: Harper Collins Publishers, 1993), 24-28.
Martin Van Creveld, Command in War (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,  1987), 27-30; J. D. Hittle, 23-24.  Alexander kept most of his father's staff structure in place, but added several special officers who acted in a capacity much like chiefs of staffs and adjutant generals. These "somatophylaxes" were often under Alexander's direct control and entrusted with special duties. For example, Eumenes of Caria functioned as Alexander's secretary, responsible for keeping the royal diary and serving as a paymaster, and in combat he performed the additional function of transmitting messages to and from Alexander's subordinates. Additionally, Alexander used surveyors who gathered information on routes, distances, resources, and camping grounds.
Jonathan P. Roth, The Logistics of the Roman Army at War (264 BC -AD 235) (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2012), 257-59, 272-75; Yann Le Bohec, The Imperial Roman Army(New York: Hippocrene Books, 1994), 38-39, 51-53.   
Azar Gat, A History of Military Thought: From the Enlightenment to the Cold War (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), 3; Felix Gilbert, "Machiavelli: The Renaissance of the Art of War," in Peter Paret, editor, Makers of Modern Strategy from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986), 11-15; Beatrice Heuser, The Evolution of Strategy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 52-53.
J. D. Hittle,
170-73.   
J. D. Hittle,
183-84, 189.   18  Michael A. Bonura, Under the Shadow of Napoleon: French Influence on the American Way of Warfare from Independence to the Eve of World War II (New York:
Hittle,  
210-14; Peter J. Schifferle, America's School for War: Fort Leavenworth, Officer Education, and Victory in World War II (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2010), 10-11.21  Hogan, 7-9.22  Schifferle, 59.   
United States War Department, Field Manual 101-5 Staff Officers' Field Manual: The Staff and Combat Orders (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1940), 5.
ADRP 6-0, 3-5; and FM 6-0, 2-1. The analysis originally included ten criteriathe seven staff tasks in current US Army doctrine and three additional criteria. Of these, only three of the criteria proved significant. The fourth, a strong and effective chief of staff that coordinates the staff activities, was kept to highlight the need and importance for staff officers to record not just the final products they produce, but also their actions in creating those orders and briefings-primarily who they communicated with, and how, during various staff actions. This will assist the US Army's ability to learn how to improve staff functions by providing sources to study historical accounts of army operations.
US First Army Headquarters, First US Army Report of Operations 20 October  1943 -1 August 1944, 13-14.   
Bradley, 176-77; Calhoun, 191-92; Hogan, 25-29; First US Army Report of  Operations 20 October 1943 -1 August 1944, 15-16; Schifferle, 121-22, 150-56;  Weigley, 84-85.   
Bradley, 200; Harrison, 174; First US Army Report of Operations 20 October  1943 -1 August 1944, 24-27.    
Harrison, 43, 116; Hogan,[46][47]; Forrest C. Pogue, The Supreme Command (Washington, DC: United States Army Center of Military History, 1989), 107; First US Army Report of Operations 20 October 1943 -1 August 1944, 25.
Harrison, 43; US First Army Headquarters, Operations Plan Neptune(US First  Army, 25 February, 1944), 6.   
Hogan,[60][61][62][63][64][65][66]. The signal detachments participated in numerous other communications exercises that spring, Carefree and Candle. In addition becoming more proficient at establishing and reestablishing their own equipment, these exercises assisted in integrating the American communications equipment with the British.
Harrison, 270.   
Bradley, Hogan,[77][78] Sylvan,[8][9][10]
[11]
[12]
Eisenhower, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, 3: 1956; Hogan, 81-82;  Sylvan, 16.    
Hogan, 83.   
Bradley, 316; Eisenhower, The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower, 3: 1937
, 1942
, 1948.
Martin Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit (Washington, DC:  Office of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army, 1961), 23. Hitler ordered a SS panzer corps made of two armored divisions to assist repelling the Allies.
Blumenson,[27][28] 30.   
Bradley, 321.   
Bradley, 337.    
Headquarters, US VII Corps, Field Order 6 (Revised Copy) (20 July 1944), 2-3.
Bradley, 332; Blumenson, Hogan, 105; VII Corps Field Order 6 (Revised Copy), 1-4;Weigley,[149][150] 
Atkinson,[139][140] Bradley, D'Este, 381, 387; Weigley, 150. The British assault on Caen used heavy bombers during the tactical offense, which had caused so much damage that they demolished the path into Caen. British forces were not able to exploit the gap until bulldozers repaired the damage, allowing the tanks to pass.
Atkinson, 145; Bradley, Blumenson, Hogan, Weigley,  149.   
approved VII Corps' request for an increased stockpile of fuel and ammunition.
Beginning the attack on February 23, VII Corps completed its initial mission by the 27th.
Collins continued to push the corps forward towards Cologne. III Corps, directly south of VII Corps, attacked southeast to linkup with Third Army near the Ahrweiler area. V Corps would attack to protect III Corps' southern flank. 
76
Using the bridges secured and established by VII Corps during its attack to support Operation Grenade, III Corps would attack south to clear additional bridges upstream.
Subsequent divisions would each cross bridges north of their area of operations, then attack south to secure bridges for the next division to use. Once III Corps completed its crossings, V Corps followed the same tactics. This sequencing of crossings avoided frontal attacks across the Roer, enabled attached tanks to move with the infantry, and created opportunities to attack the defending Germans in their flanks. 77 
76 Atkinson,
Hogan,
MacDonald,
Commanding General
February -8 May 1945," 6, 11-12. 77 MacDonald, 191-92;
First US Army Report of Operations 23 February -8 May 1945, 13
To prepare for Operation Lumberjack and assist their subordinate units, First Army staff worked with other headquarters and units to ensure that the corps and division had the required supplies and equipment to breach and cross the Rhine. First Army engineers and logisticians' detailed planning and coordination highlight the importance of communicating with outside headquarters and units. Often using unorthodox methods to ensure the delivery of requested supplies, First Army staff ensured that the corps had the supplies and equipment they needed to execute Operation Lumberjack.
Throughout Operation Lumberjack, the First Army staff assisted its subordinate commanders and units by changing corps boundaries and priorities. This enabled adjustment of responsibilities and priorities among subordinate units, meaning the First Army staff could enable corps commanders to focus on the most critical task they needed to accomplish at any given time. These simple changes controlled the tactical actions in time, space, and purpose. This action -one of the final operations conducted by the Allies in Western Europe, serves as a textbook example of a headquarters executing operational art.
In addition to conducting staff activities, which US Army doctrine now refers to as the operations process, the First Army staff continuously performed several particularly significant actions during the three cases analyzed. These include assisting subordinate commanders, staffs, and units, and informing units and organizations outside the headquarters. Additionally, the staff officers proved adaptive and flexible in overcoming problems as they identified them. The staff continuously formed new subsections both within its own organization and among outside organizations as needed to facilitate staff coordination.
The detailed planning for Operation Neptune required significant coordination with outside organizations. Co-location of the various planning sections in the same town made them more accessible to one another, reducing the time required to discuss changes in the situation and modify the plan. The staff's actions during the planning for and execution of Operation Cobra highlight the importance of communicating with outside organizations. The poor communication between First Army and Eighth Air Force resulted in friendly casualties caused by inaccurate preparatory bombing. While the staff probably could have prevented all of the casualties lost to friendly fire, effective communication between the staffs would have informed Bradley of the Eighth Air Force's refusal to change the approach direction of the bombers, limiting their ability to achieve safely the effects he desired. If better informed, Bradley could possibly have averted the costly mistakes-perhaps by convincing the Allied airmen to change approach paths, or by increasing the distance the ground troops withdrew from the front line. In contrast, First Army's close communication and coordination with IX Tactical Air Force resulted in great success of air-ground coordination in exploiting the breakout. The lessons learned from the poor coordination with Eighth Air Force may have formed the basis for the creation of the joint air operations section and the co-location of the First Army and IX Tactical Air Force's command posts, greatly enhancing the communication between the two headquarters.
In each of the case studies, the First Army staff assisted its subordinate commanders, staffs, and units. Prior to Neptune, First Army staff provided liaisons to assist the corps in planning. During the operation, First Army began assuming the