# ID: fe6c364bba7540769cd91b25ac4d7b2a
# Title: Cognitive Transformation Through Cyberspace: A Twenty-First Century Postmodern Power Strategy
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2018.0
# Fulltext:
Military victory appears to be growing more elusive in the twenty-first century owing to an increasingly contested information environment. Military operations in the contemporary operating environment are subject to a battle of narratives and metanarratives used by adversaries. This friction is best described as tremors on the fault line between modern, the inherently scientific and empirical, and postmodern battlefields where perception, information, and influence gain primacy. Cyberspace offers a medium for bridging this divide. The ubiquity and instantaneity of information and connectedness through the Internet has evolved into a social common through which individuals and groups form identities and exert influence. Postmodern power strategies seek to subvert traditional power structures and have the ability to thrive in a domain that offers equal access to all and, potentially, influence over all. Underpinning this connectedness is a relationship that has formed between the humans and cyberspace which affects self-perception, relationships, and reality construction that must be examined and accounted for in military planning.
iii
Today, after more than a century of electric technology, we have extended our central nervous system itself in a global embrace, abolishing both space and time as far as our planet is concerned. Rapidly, we approach the final phase of the extensions of man --the technological simulation of consciousness, when the creative process of knowing will be collectively and corporately extended to the whole of human society.
-Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, 1964   On October 16, 2006, a thirteen-year-old girl named Megan Meier ended her own life in her home in O'Fallon, Missouri. At a young age, Megan struggled with depression, weight loss, and bullying at school. Having made substantial progress on her weight, the prospect of having her braces removed soon, attending a new school, and playing on the volleyball team, Megan's outlook appeared quite positive. At her request, Megan's parents permitted her to establish a supervised social media account on Myspace. Soon after, a boy named Josh friend requested Megan. Josh had just moved to the area and could empathize with Megan's struggles. Over the period of a month, Josh wrote kind and innocently affectionate messages. This was uncharted and captivating territory for thirteen-year-old Megan which broke the previous cycle of negative selfimage and insecurity reinforced by encounters with bullies. Megan became deeply invested, asking her mom to sign her on to Myspace after school to see what messages Josh sent. One day, Josh's affections changed unexpectedly, attacking Megan's treatment of other people, insulting her physical appearance, and ultimately declaring that "the world would be a better place without you." Megan fell into cognitive vertigo. In the confusion, she lashed back at Josh with colorful language that upset her mother, causing a dispute between them. Feeling betrayed, Megan went to her room, where her mother found her twenty minutes later hanging from the closet door frame. Devastated, Megan's parents sought to discover who Josh was and bring him to justice. They later discovered that Josh never existed; another neighborhood woman created the Myspace account and alter ego. 
1
2
3
The cyberspace domain is unique among all other domains of warfare. Unlike the land, air, sea, and space, cyberspace is man-made. US Army Field Manual (FM) 3-12 states that "cyberspace is an extensive and complex global network." 
4
5
6
7
In 1964, Canadian philosopher Marshall McLuhan wrote prophetically on the nature of new media technologies as extensions of humanity. Well before a global Internet came to be, McLuhan observed that "any extension of ourselves," whether through technologies or mediums of communication, "affects the whole psychic and social complex." 9 He delivers a stark warning that society's historical infatuation over content obscures the underlying cognitive, psychological, and sociological effects of the new medium. Most people take this creation for granted. In a sense, the Internet and the resources it makes available become perceived as a natural phenomenon which directly affects the trust freely given to the content delivered through it. Like a frog boiled slowly, experts believe that the informatization of society is changing humanity as newer generations will not know a world without the smartphone, social media, or minute-byminute news updates and instantaneous information access. 
10
11
8
The history of narrative dates back as far as human existence in the form of storytelling as the primary mechanism for creating, conveying, reflecting, and retaining societal knowledge.
In the wake of the information revolution, the use of the cyberspace domain to influence popular perceptions of local, regional, and world events toward revanchist, revisionist, and extremist narratives surged; a theme that military leaders expect to continue into the future.
12
13
Given the unique, dynamic, and symbiotic relationship between humanity and the cyberspace domain, the research question that this monograph seeks to explore is: What unique capability does the cyber domain present to the narrative space and what does it suggest for operational art? Current views on the nature and role of cyberspace in military operations are incomplete and subsequently obscure the full potential of the domain for influence operations. An examination of the connection between the fundamental role of narrative in humans and the effects of cyberspace on humans helps to illuminate future potential and explain recent activities by hybrid threats through information warfare. This monograph seeks to fill the gap created by previous research and perceptions which relegate the military role of the cyberspace domain to a highspeed avenue of approach, extension of operational reach, or additive capability. Subsequent sections build an argument through a multidisciplinary approach and recent historical examples to illustrate the emergent role of the cyberspace domain in the narrative space and to encourage broader discourse among senior leaders and planners on military operations in and through cyberspace.
The next section addresses a complex human psychological and sociological phenomenon and achieves several objectives that form foundational understanding of how adversaries succeed at engaging and influencing populations through narrative using information and communication technologies (ICTs). The section answers the additional supporting questions: what are the origins of narrative and why are they so fundamentally important to understanding human behavior?; what is their role in reality and identity construction?; what are postmodern narrative techniques and how are they used to exploit asymmetry and subvert power structures?; and what is the nature and impact of the evolving relationship between humans and cyberspace? The origins of narrative, meaning, and sense-making draw from the fields of psychology and sociology which form the basis for individual reality and identity construction.
These concepts build the case for understanding how and why people use narrative every day to understand their environment and take action. The sociological study of how people create knowledge and share it to self-organize into groups allows the transition into seeing narrative as a larger, more complex, phenomenon and tool for influence. Important to understanding how each of the aforementioned phenomena are exploited by adversaries, an examination of postmodern philosophy and narrative techniques is necessary. Such techniques manipulate language, systems for knowledge creation, and meaning (semantics) in order to pose an asymmetric threat to existing power structures. Finally, the information revolution, social technologies, and their impact on society draw a direct connection from the digital realm to human cognition which makes us more vulnerable to threats that emerged on the battlefield over the past decade.
The next section illustrates contemporary use of postmodern narrative strategies through cyberspace to influence perceptions and behaviors of domestic and international populations.
Modern Russian information warfare benefits from deep historical roots in reflexive control theory and maskirovka which explains the fundamental divergence of US and Russian philosophies on the nature and role of cyberspace in warfare. Contemporary examples of Russian information warfare illustrate a migration of propaganda activities toward cyberspace as part of a broader strategy to shape the operating environment.
The monograph concludes through a synthesis of the concepts presented and suggests that the United States' philosophy on the nature and role of cyberspace is wanting for broader discourse on, and greater attention to, a domain that collapses time and space and is evolving the way humans communicate and interact. The contemporary and anticipated operating environment are highly complex and present new and unique problems across the globe. The remainder of the introduction examines themes of existing military literature on narrative and cyberspace. This helps to highlight a gap in thought over the past decade, then frames the operating environment as a contested narrative space using a theoretical, historical, and doctrinal approach. Finally, an overview of the western philosophical logic of war illustrates why the United States has traditionally overlooked the impact of cyberspace on the intangible aspects of the contemporary battlefield.
Military writing on the narrative space and its importance for use in the modern operating environment is plentiful, but also disjointed. Few have asked why it is so effective at a deep human and societal level, what techniques are used to construct them, and what impact informatization of society has on making it more effective. Less understood is the symbiotic relationship between humanity and the Internet that is altering human cognitive and societal evolution. This fundamental oversight has led to numerous viewpoints on how cyberspace ought to be leveraged as a domain of warfare while falling short of exploring its impact on the nature of warfare. Research for this monograph required exploration of literature from both the narrative space and of operations in and through cyberspace.
Military scholarship on narrative reinforces the position that its use within the information environment is paramount to enduring success and favorable interpretation of military operations by populations. 
14
Reorienting the military's understanding required asking why narrative is a fundamental function of human beings through an examination and application of narrative theory. 
15
16
Research for this monograph contextualizes narrative more appropriately in the realm of storytelling, sense-making, and public diplomacy for shaping and influencing human behavior.
Opinions on the role of cyberspace in the context of military operations and the narrative space are equally diverse. With respect to Information Related Capabilities (IRCs), cyber doctrine describes its role as a highspeed delivery mechanism. 
18
19
20
Recent reports on operations to counter the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) appear to indicate success in the integration of special operations forces and cyberspace capabilities.
Publication 3-13.2, Military Information Support Operations, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2016.
Joint Task Force (JTF) Ares, a US Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER) effort dedicated to counter ISIS operations, proved itself over the past year in a campaign that "provided devastating effects on the adversary." 
21
Recent developments by the US Army to field cyberspace and information operations capabilities down to the Brigade Combat Team level are gaining traction. 
23
24
22 Ibid. 
23
shows an increased emphasis on integrating influence activities in joint operations. 
25
26
Technology is first and foremost a tool and one that only takes on meaning and purpose within the specific social and cultural formations in which it is deployed.
-Antoine Bousquet, The Scientific Way of Warfare Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the world entered a period of unipolarity during which its security became underwritten by the United States. 
27
31
35
36
38
The problem with how the military views the role and nature of cyberspace in operations gains significance within a larger and broader pattern over centuries of western warfare. Author and lecturer in international relations Antoine Bousquet describes Western civilization's consistent attempt to apply "scientific method and insights to warfare in its totality"; convincing ourselves that, we simply have not yet developed the technology or rational thought to discover and understand nature (what is real) and its truths (what it means) fully. 
39
38
40
With regard to cyberspace, the US military views the nature and importance of information through an objectivist ontology and modernist philosophy. Information as a stateful, stored, and tangible thing gains primacy over intangible cognitive relationships and effects. This stance places a primacy on targeting and exploitation of data, servers, and nodes in order to gain a battlefield advantage. An appreciation for the use of cyberspace to gain cognitive effects first requires an understanding of the human psychological and sociological role of narrative, and how new technologies are causing humans to evolve how they make sense of the world.
Human Cognition, Narrative, and the Cyber Domain Sense and Meaning Making Through Narrative So, in this forced inaction I looked for the equation between my book-reading and my movements, and spent the intervals of uneasy sleeps and dreams in plucking at the tangle of our present…I began to recall suitable maxims on the conduct of modern scientific war. But they would not fit, and it worried me.
Having fallen ill during raids on Turkish railways and lines of communication near Medina, British Major Thomas Edward Lawrence spent about ten days recuperating. This time afforded him the ability to reflect on what he and the Arab Revolt (1916-1918), which until then had been driven by instinct and intuition, accomplished thus far. One of humanity's most fundamental cognitive functions is to make sense of and understand the environment, life events, relationships, and their identities. It is universal. People draw upon experience, memories, intuition, education, and their five senses as lenses through which they perceive reality and build knowledge. This reality varies from person to person based on their own perception of the environment and interpretation of events. Individual realities are also dynamic and, in many ways, self-preserving to maintain what psychologist Daniel Kahneman calls "cognitive ease." 
41
42
Lawrence traces through his knowledge of military theory to examine the means and ends of the current campaign. In essence, he is attempting to fit what has happened (System I intuition) with a known theory of warfare that helps to explain recent outcomes and inform his planning and continued campaign execution. Ultimately, confounded in his attempt, he reflects (engagement of System II) on the problem at hand; the vast open desert as his operating environment, an enemy whose mobility relies upon fixed lines of communication, and a friendly force that is reluctant to engage in decisive battle. Lawrence concludes that, "thinking convinced me that our recent practice had been better than our theory." 
43
44
42
43
44
But why narratives? How is story telling so fundamental to the human experience?
Numerous neuroscientific studies point to connections between narrative, brain function, and human behavioral response. Studies funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) traced narrative exposure to the synchronization of physiological and behavioral reactions among groups of people. 
45
46
48
The human effort to understand, in order to support decision making, leads logically toward discovering one's role and actions in the environment-a concept known as agency. With regard to human psychology, agency manifests in one's ability to plan actions in their environment with forethought, intentionality, and subsequently, react and reflect. The fundamental agentic properties of self-reaction and self-reflection give way to the individual development of personal identity and efficacy. 
49
50
51
A person's reflection on the aforementioned questions concerning the self requires progression from seeking understanding toward deriving meaning. The result is the collection and refinement of knowledge. Psychologist Dr. Harlene Anderson asserts unambiguously the role that narrative plays in everyday life toward the purpose of self-identity, reality perception, and the attainment of knowledge as follows:
Narrative is a dynamic process that constitutes both the way that we organize the events and experiences of our lives to make sense of them and the way we participate in creating the things we make sense of, including ourselves. In a narrative view, our descriptions, our vocabularies, and our stories constitute our understanding of human nature and behavior. Our views of human nature and behavior are only a matter of our descriptive vocabularies, our language conversations, and our stories and narratives. Our stories form, inform, and re-form our sources of knowledge, our views of reality. 
53
In their seminal work, The Social Construction of Reality, Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann provide an unprecedented and detailed accounting of how realities, identities, and knowledge are created, exchanged, and cemented into collective being through human social exchange. This essential work provides the connective tissue that bridges individual sensemaking and self-continuity to the conveyance of collective reality, identity, and continuity to create cultures, ethnicities, and societal history as sources of knowledge. 
54
55
Narrative is present in myth, legend, fable, tale, novella, epic, history, tragedy, drama, comedy, mime, painting, stained glass windows, cinema, comics, news items, conversations. Moreover, under this almost infinite diversity of forms, narrative is present in every age, in everyplace, in every society; it begins with the very history of mankind and there nowhere is nor has been a people without narrative. All classes, all human groups, have their narratives. 
56
57
Oppression of Turkish or Iraqi Kurds may spark greater cohesion and support of a shared ethnic identity across multiple national boundaries, or an infringement on national sovereignty may bring Syrian national identity to the fore. Collective sense-making and societal identity gain durability through the "redrafting of an emerging story so that it becomes more comprehensive, incorporates more of the observed data [events], and is more resilient in the face of criticism." 
58
59
Narratives, in their numerous forms, have evolved with communities from images and symbols, to the spoken and written word. Here, language, text, audio, and visual become mutable mediating agents to deliver meaning and plot. Each new communications medium presents a new method of connecting societies and telling stories that influence perceptions of the world and events. Innovations in technology, such as the printing press and the Internet, speed up the rate by which societies interact and imprint ideas and perspectives upon each other. Rapid exchange of culture and ideas, and interconnectivity between societies, are the essence of globalization.
Technology, however, is often regarded myopically as an agent for speed and exchange, rather than its impact on how we perceive the world through new narrative forms.
Natural tensions arise internal to a society or nation, and externally between nations and cultures when there is a failure to reconcile fundamental differences. Internal to a group, tensions arise as a result of anomalies experienced and felt by a population that run counter to the narrative expressed by a national, religious, or social authority. Political groups with their own view on US domestic policy will offer an interpretation of actions and events that is consistent with their overarching explanatory narrative. Between groups, nations, and cultures, tensions arise along fault lines where the philosophies of thought diverge, causing political, economic, and in many cases, physical military confrontation. For example, numerous Cold War era conflicts gained greater attention by large powers based on the tensions between the United States' self-perceived global role as opposed to the Soviet-Russian view. Ultimately, it is the most compelling, coherent narrative, deemed legitimate by its target audience, that gains popularity and acceptance because 59 Francesca Polletta, Pang Ching Bobby Chen, Beth Gharrity Gardner, and Alice Motes, "The Sociology of Storytelling," Annual Review of Sociology 37, no. 1 (August 2011): 109-130. it creates a causal chain of events among actors that makes sense in a larger context. This is a dangerous prospect from a national security perspective as adversaries undermine power structures by delivering alternative interpretations of US diplomatic, economic, and military action. It is through the "all informing process of narrative" that Marxist theorist, Frederic Jameson sought to "restructure the problematics of ideology, of the unconscious and of desire, of representation, of history, and of cultural production." 
60
61
Ultimately narratives "are the fundamental human device for enabling communities to act collectively." 62 Collective identity builds national, ethnic, and cultural coherence but does not bridge the gap toward political action, social movements, or war on its own. Narrators may take advantage of collective identity by promoting the primacy of a particular emergent property of a target audience. This can be done through cultural, ethnic, religious, or territorial sub-identity in order to encourage collective action. 
63
64
The idea of being exploited by constructed narratives can be uncomfortable. People enjoy having the general sense that they are in control of their environment and that their reality makes sense. Problematically, it is exactly this desire for sense making, cognitive ease, and a search for meaning that make the human brain vulnerable to agenda-driven or adversarial narratives. In essence, these become alternate interpretations of one's environment over time. With respect to revanchist, revisionist, and extremist ideologues, populations become open to influence through rewritten histories, reinterpreted territorial claims or national identities, and warped interpretation of religious practice. This inherently human condition is rooted in philosophically debated questions on how humans validate knowledge. Going forward, research shows how modern and postmodern epistemologies offer theoretical frameworks for how we can claim to know something.
Simplifying to the extreme, I define the postmodern as incredulity toward metanarratives.
-Jean Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition I'm not arguing that it's a good thing that stories are so powerful. We can be misled, and we are. Part of why I try to talk about this is to arm people, in a sense, against stories because people are trying to manipulate us all the time.
-Frederick W. Mayer
The psychological and sociological examination of narrative's role in human cognition and societal self-organization illustrates a remarkable vulnerability that adversaries seek to exploit. Given that the ultimate goal of cognition, on an individual and societal level, is to inform how people act in the environment, various narrative forms serve to provide alternative interpretations of reality that coerce or persuade ethnic, religious, or national groups to action. As such, narrative becomes the mechanism through which power, as a monopoly over legitimate knowledge, is attained, retained, and exerted. French philosopher Michel Foucault's work on power relations and fields of knowledge recognized this phenomenon and expounded on the inextricable link between the two. 65 Disputed views on knowledge and knowability stem from deeper modern and postmodern philosophical underpinnings. Postmodern power strategies and the human vulnerability to narratives create an environment where traditional power structures are questioned, knowledge authority and power are in constant flux, and reality is highly subjective and mutable toward adversarial agendas. 
66
67
65 
Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972
-1977
(London: Panthon, 1980), 134-145. 66
67
Postmodernism, in its purest form, calls into question all knowledge that society takes for granted. Traditional knowledge claims by authoritative bodies are able to be rejected, along with much of their associated power. Postmodernism regards nothing as objective and everything as open to interpretation and reinterpretation, essentially refuting the modernist view.
Postmodernists view the centralization of control or privilege over knowledge under a single authority as a cause of disparity among people [s]. Thus, as an interpretive philosophy, the use of language, written or verbal, in a calculated fashion can tip the power balance of any given set of "truths" to create new "knowledge." 
68
Industrial designer Klaus Krippendorff's landmark work, The Semantic Turn, supports the idea that "no artifact can be realized within a culture without being meaningful to those who can move it through its various definitions."
69
No longer are products and interfaces the method for designing potential futures. Rather it becomes the semantics, the meaning, that drives the creation of potential futures and, interestingly, can alter the past. Extended to social issues, such as race or gender, where people now ask what it means to be black, white, male, female, Iraqi, Kurdish, a voter, or a citizen in a 68 Christopher Butler, Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 13-43.
given society. Postmodern strategy seeks new future trajectories starting with 'semantics of things' rather than the 'things' themselves.
Postmodern strategies use narrative and language games to inject new meaning (semantics) into an existing body of knowledge (discourse) to diminish its power and alter trajectories of action (Ref. Figure 
3
70
71
72
The Human Journey for Knowledge in the Age of Google When a community develops some extension of itself [technology], it tends to allow all other functions to be altered to accommodate that form. Men are suddenly nomadic gatherers of knowledge.
-Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, 1964   As we come to rely on computers to mediate our understanding of the world, it is our own intelligence that flattens into artificial intelligence.
-Nicholas Carr, The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains Today, it is in cyberspace that the narrative role in cognition and social collective action, and postmodern power strategies that subvert traditional knowledge authorities in society come to a head. The convergence of these phenomena forms a human condition that leaves persons and societies vulnerable to compelling adversarial stories which are designed to produce desired actions and shape power dynamics. The information revolution within which humanity currently exists breeds "nomadic gatherers of knowledge." 76 Problematically, the increasing rapidity in which information is created online surpasses the human ability to process, analyze, translate, and ultimately make sense and meaning. 
77
76
77 Luciano Floridi, The Fourth Revolution: How the Infosphere is Reshaping Human Reality (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 1-23. legitimate knowledge is eroded significantly which allows pre-packaged, easily digestible information to achieve primacy. New narrative forms continue to adapt to meet the need for rapid processing to facilitate alternative interpretations of reality and provide an impetus to alter behavioral trajectory. The impact of digital technologies and cyberspace on human cognition, identity, and social self-organization further exacerbate the human postmodern condition and influence of adversarial narratives.
The advent and development of the Internet represented a new global medium through which humans evolved their methods of intercommunication and explored new sources of knowledge. The past decade arguably represents the most rapid period of change with increased mobility and the creation of information, of questionable credibility, through social media (Twitter, Facebook, Snap Chat, YouTube, Instagram, etc.) and other communication applications.
In January of 2018, global Internet and social media penetration reached 54 percent and 42 percent respectively, far outpacing population growth, year after year, as depicted in Figure 
4
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
The impacts of Internet communication and social media on identity construction is another facet of this condition that continues to be studied over time. How individuals choose to present themselves online, reflect on their created self-image, and subsequently reidentify over time reveals the intense impact of a mutable online identity on one's psychological identity in the real world. 
87
83
88
89
90
ICTs and social media expand the human ability to discover persons and groups with common bonds across non-contiguous geography. Not only can geographically dispersed members of a cultural, ethnic, or displaced national group coalesce online, but members of social and political movements (Occupy, Black Lives Matter, #MeToo, etc.) possess the ability to rapidly organize, gather support, and advance their cause. Because an individual may have numerous online personas, depending on the context of the discussion or forum of communication, individuals are able to organize and coalesce around much more fine-grained, emergent commonalities. 
91
96
The Soviet Union began research into reflexive control theory in the early 1960s and consistently progressed its development into a fully operational Russian psychological capability through the late 1990s, designed to disrupt, confuse, divert, and ultimately control an adversary's decision making. 
97
98
1
99
96
101
[Information warfare is] confrontation between two or more states in the information space for damaging the information systems, processes, and resources, which are of critical importance, and other structures, to undermining the political, economic, and social system, and massive brainwashing of the population for destabilizing the society and state, and also forcing the state to make decisions in the interests of the confronting party. 
102
103
In the age of mass online media, Russia has taken several steps to enhance its capability to deliver prepared information and propaganda through seemingly legitimate channels to both domestic and international audiences. A RAND study from 2016 examined this process over the past decade concluded that Russia's "firehose of falsehood" model for propaganda is highly earliest instances of Russian use of cyberspace to create instability among populations occurred in Tallinn, Estonia in 2007 in response to the relocation of a Soviet-era, Red Army statue. The Russian government decried this as an insult to the Russian ethnic minority inside Estonia and the erasure of past Soviet military sacrifices. In a country that boasted one of the world's most technologically advanced governments, life as many Estonians knew it came to a halt as distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks and web defacements against Estonian government, communications, and economic targets ensued. The heavy weighting toward Russia's information-technical capabilities in this instance had psychological impacts all of their own. Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets over the inability for the Estonian government to respond which nested perfectly within widespread online anti-west, pro-Russian, disinformation and propaganda that preceded the attacks; all of which were intended to influence a highly information-centric society. 
107
The Russian incursions into the Republic of Georgia in 2008, and the Crimean Peninsula in 2013 through 2014 demonstrate progressive steps toward perfecting information control in conjunction with kinetic military operations. This is a significant milestone and illustrates the creation and exploitation of strategic ambiguity in the operating environment by severing a nation's information infrastructure. If strategic audiences neither have access to information nor the ability to provide narrative interpretation of the operating environment, belligerent actors may dominate and shape the sole narrative interpretation of events on the ground. The isolated battlefield information environment afforded Russia greater flexibility in their choice of kinetic activities and ample time to accomplish their objectives without outside interference. While government and its western sponsors, and presenting a strong benevolent Russian state. 
112
113
Most recently, Russian efforts to use, pose as, or co-opt cyberspace trolls, hacktivist groups, fake social media accounts, and in several cases thousands of automated machine users known as "bots" to influence other nations' domestic politics has taken center stage. 
114
117
118
119
Russia's information-psychological operations in cyberspace continue to sharpen through each new iteration into a complex cognitive operational capability. Russian philosophies on information war and cyberspace are informed by and adapted from Soviet reflexive control theory and maskirovka doctrine to deliver narratives that distort reality, exploit interpretive ambiguity, and alter decision making. Efforts to undermine US and international institutions, alter national trajectories, create and exploit interpretive ambiguity, and stoke enmity amongst populations to alter geopolitics make Russian information warfare consonant with postmodern power strategies. This realization should force the United States to carefully reconsider what these actions constitute along the continuum of geopolitical struggle and the broader potential that cyberspace offers national strategy.
Cyberspace represents a great deal more than merely computers, networks, nodes, data, and electrons. Marshall McLuhan brilliantly theorized on the psycho-social interplay between humans and the technologies they create; the Internet is causing us to evolve just as we evolve the meaning and utility of the Internet. Today, social media and other communications applications provide adversaries ubiquitous channels through which alternative interpretations of reality are delivered through new narrative forms for the purpose of influence and behavior modification. Indeed, cyberspace is constantly changing which must force operational designers to question how each new application or Internet connected technology alters the landscape with respect to human interaction and the resulting implications for military operations. The research for this monograph aimed at generating broader discourse on the nature and role of cyberspace in military operational art by examining a complex convergence of phenomena that explain current asymmetric threats posed in this domain.
People are sense and meaning making machines. The cognitive process responsible for understanding subsequently produces action within the environment. Narratives provide the time and space construct for human cognition that enables memory retention, forms personal identity, and contextualizes a person's world view and active role within it. As such, the construction of individual reality is highly subjective, mutable, and under constant external influence. The narrative role in individual reality construction extends to form societies, cultures, belief systems, and nations. Narratives and master narratives provide a logic and coherence to groups of people with shared interests which produces a strategic direction for collective action. It is here that political discourse acts as a mediating agent within a society to reconcile tensions over emerging social issues or crises.
Postmodern strategies disrupt and redirect the natural political discourse by generating crises, exploiting interpretive ambiguity that master narratives fail to explain, and attacking the legitimacy of societal institutions to alter strategic trajectories over time. In the age of cyberspace, postmodern narrative strategies are thriving as the human journey for legitimate knowledge is supplanted by instantaneous access to false information, propaganda, and agenda driven narratives. The trajectory of cyberspace, ICTs, and social media influence are not flattening.
Rather, humanity continues to discover new ways to envelope the environment in all things digital which in turn alters our cognitive and societal evolution. The key is to understand how the new technology affects human interaction and society within the context of warfare.
Russian cyberspace activities over the past decade illustrate how a nation's philosophical view concerning the value of information and geopolitical struggle can produce a very different strategy in a new domain. Interestingly, discourse on Chinese economic practices has recently come to the fore as well. China's current position of economic advantage owes to widespread, state-sanctioned intellectual property theft from numerous countries over several years' time and illustrates yet another expression of strategic thought in cyberspace. This represents one phase in a larger game of stratagems which will adapt as new national policy objectives materialize.
The US cyber force faces significant challenges in the defense of the nation against foreign information-psychological threats, and on the offense to shape the OE in support of combat operations. The current organization of the US military's information related capabilities, IO, PSYOPS, and cyber, requires greater integration and legal agility that fully appreciates the objectives that our adversaries seek to achieve. The United States must take these factors into consideration to broaden its national strategy for cyberspace and anticipate the actions of other nations in the domain.
30  
30  
99 S. Leonenko, "Refleksivnoe upravlenie protivnikom," (Reflexive Control of the Enemy), Armeykiy Sbornik (Army Collection), no. 8 (1995): 28. 100 Roger Beaumont,
"Megan Meier Foundation | The Story of Megan Meier," accessed December 8,
2017, https://www.meganmeierfoundation.org/megans-story.html.
David D. Luxton, Jennifer D. June, and Jonathan M. Fairall, "Social Media and Suicide: A Public Health Perspective," American Journal of Public Health 102, no. S2 (May, 2012): S195-S200, accessed December 7, 2017, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3477910/.
Sameer Hinduja and Justin W. Patchin, "Bullying, Cyberbullying, and Suicide," Archives of SuicideResearch 14, no. 3 (2010): 206-221.    
US Department of the Army, Field Manual 3-12, Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017.
Thomas E. Ricks, "We need a cyber corps as a 5 th service," Foreign Policy, March 18, 2015, accessed December 10, 2017, http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/03/18/we-need-a-cyber-corps-as-a-5thservice/.
6 "Can the Warfare Concept of Maneuver Be Usefully Applied in Cyber Operations," The Cyber Defense Review, accessed November 2, 2017, http://cyberdefensereview.army.mil/The-Journal/Article-Display/Article/1136059/can-the-warfare-concept-of-maneuver-be-usefully-applied-in-cyber-operations/; "Operational Graphics for Cyberspace," National Defense University Press, accessed November 5, 2017, http://ndupress.ndu.edu/Publications/Article/1130660/operational-graphics-for-cyberspace/
.7  This webpage no longer exists at the SUNY Plattsburgh site. This book was recovered using the Wayback Machine Internet Archive at archive.org/web/ and the subsequent web address. RichardRobbins,  The Belief Machine, (1985), 6, accessed October 14, 2017, http://faculty.plattsburgh.edu/richard.robbins/Belief/belief-machine.htm.
Kep Kee Loh and Ryota Kanai, "How Has the Internet Reshaped Human Cognition?" The Neuroscientist 22, no. 5 (October 2016): 506-520; Dave Chaffey, "Global Social Media Research Summary 2016," Smart Insights 8 (2016).
Paul Virilio, Lost Dimension (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1983), 25.   
US Army Capabilities Integration Center, "The Operational Environment and the Changing Character of Future Warfare," accessed December 7, 2017, http://www.arcic.army.mil/App_Documents/The-Operational-Environment-and-the-Changing-Characterof-Future-Warfare.pdf.
  13  Beth Bailey and Richard H. Immerman, Understanding the U.S. Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan (New York: New York University Press, 2015), 220-237; Jonathon Cosgrove, "Context is King," in "Special Operations in a Chaotic World," special issue, Prism 6, no. 3 (December 2016).
US Department of the Army, Field Manual 3-12, Cyberspace and Electronic Warfare Operations, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017.
Ryan Gladding and Sean McQuade, "Cyber-Enabled Unconventional Warfare: The Convergence of Cyberspace, Social Mobilization, and Special Warfare," Thesis (Monterey: Naval Postgraduate School,
2015); Andrzej V. Kujawski, "Cyberspace Actions in a Counterinsurgency," Thesis (Monterey: Naval Postgraduate School, 2016); 20 Steven R. Thompson, "Countering the Narrative: Combating the Ideology of Radical Islam," /luce.nt/ A Journal of National Security Studies (2012), accessed December 7, 2017, http://www.usnwc.edu/Lucent/OpenPdf.aspx?id=130&title=Perspective.
Isaac R. Porche III, Christopher Paul, Chad C. Serena, Colin P. Clark, Erin-Elizabeth Johnson, Drew Herrick, Tactical Cyber: Building a Strategy for Cyber Support to Corps and Below (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017).
US Department of Defense, Joint Publication 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States Incorporating Change 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2017).
The White House, "National Security Strategy of the United States of America" (December 18, 2017).
Gideon Rose, How Wars End: Why  We Always Fight the Last Battle (New York: Simon and Schuster Paperbacks, 2010),
  28  John A. Lynn, Battle: A History ofCombat and Culture (Boulder: Westview Press, 2003), 321- 322.   
Clausewitz, On War, 70,[96][97][119][120][121] 137.   
Karl E. Weick, Kathleen M. Sutcliffe, and David Obstfeld, "Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking," Organizational Science 16, no. 4 (2005): 409-421.
Klaus Krippendorf, The Semantic Turn: A New Foundation for Design(CRC Press, 2005), 174.
Rima Berns-McGown, "Redefining 'Diaspora': The Challenge of Connection and Inclusion," International Journal 63, no. 1 (Winter 2007/2008): 3-20.
Simon Kemp, "Digital in 2018: World's Internet Users Pass the 4 Billion Mark," We Are Social, January 30, 2018, accessed February 8, 2018, https://wearesocial.com/blog/2018/01/global-digital-report-2018.
 79  Scott, Joint Operating Environment 2035: The Joint Force in a Contested and Disordered World
.80  McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions ofMan,[10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19] 
Timothy L. Thomas, "Psycho Viruses and Reflexive Control: Russian Theories of Information-Psychological War," in Information at War: From China's Three Warfares to NATO's Narratives, ed. Peter Pomerantsev (London: Legatum Institute, September 2015), 16-21.
102 Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation, Conceptual Views Regarding the Activities of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation in Information Space, (2011), accessed January 22, 2018, http://www.ccdcoe.org/strategies/Russian_Federation_unofficial_translation.
pdf. 103 Timothy L. Thomas, "Dialectical Versus Empirical Thinking: Ten Key Elements of the Russian Understanding of Information Operations," Journal of Slavic Military Studies 11, no. 1 (1998): 40-62.
Michael Connell and Sarah Vogler, Russia's  Approach to Cyber Warfare (Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analyses, 2017).
Jonathan Masters, "Russia, Trump, and  the 2016 U.S. Election," Council on Foreign Relations, February 26, 2018, accessed March 8, 2018, https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/russia-trump-and-2016-uselection.
118 Jason Parham, "Russians Posing as Black Activists on Facebook is More Than Fake News," Wired, October 18, 2017, accessed February 10, 2018, https://www.wired.com/story/russian-black-activistfacebook-
accounts/.119  Erin Griffith, "Pro-Gun Russian Bots Flood Twitter After Parkland Shooting," Wired, February 15, 2018, accessed March 4, 2018, https://www.wired.com/story/pro-gun-russian-bots-flood-twitter-afterparkland-shooting/.
No words of mine can fully express the deep gratitude I have for my wife Stephanie and her enduring support throughout our twelve-year Army journey. Thank you for your support once
issues to influence public policy and law. Finally, such strategies seek to generate and exploit the ambiguity present when a crisis occurs by offering alternative interpretations of events as they unfold, in order to change a society's strategic trajectory toward an unintended one. Postmodern warfare then, as a strategy to upend traditional knowledge claims and power structures, is nicely captured as a, "multi-domain, borderless competition dominated by state and non-state actors who possess the ability to manipulate information through narratives that decisively overwhelm or undermine adversaries, focusing on non-combatants for sources of political dissidence." 
73
74
75
74
75
104
105
Russia's information warfare strategy does not follow a prescriptive template for each engagement and is capable of tailoring its objectives from local or domestic, to regionalized and global foreign audiences with shrewd attention to politics and societal identities. 
106