# ID: ff096d9d7b914888ba244d0931decb42
# Title: Competing in the Gray Zone: Russian Tactics and Western Responses
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
• "Everyday" gray zone actions must be differentiated from more aggressive and focused gray zone actions.
There are two variables, the target of the action and whether it involves outright violence or the threat of violence, that are important for understanding Russian gray zone tactics, because they imply different time horizons, objectives, and stakes.
Many of the unconventional tactics that Russia uses to try to gain influence are routine, diffuse, and long-term, although others have very specific, short-term objectives.
Russian gray zone tactics might also be nonviolent (e.g., propaganda and disinformation) or involve outright violence or the threat of violence (e.g., a planned coup in Montenegro). •
Based on the war games conducted to support this project, we observed that NATO and the European Union (EU) are unlikely to be able to compel Russia to stop using nonviolent Russian gray zone tactics, but they might be able to deter high-order aggression.
There is much talk about "deterring" Russian gray zone aggression, but many of these discussions are based on a misunderstanding of the concept.
Because Russia is already engaging in steady-state gray zone actions, NATO and the EU need to compel Russia to stop these activities, which is a much harder task than deterrence.
Moreover, the characteristics of everyday gray zone tactics-they are largely nonmilitary, usually gradual, and difficult to decisively attribute-lower the stakes and make it difficult for the West to credibly threaten to punish Russia, even if the actions are conclusively traced back to Moscow.
Outright Russian aggression with the aim of territorial expansion is an entirely different situation, and one that can be deterred by conventional means. •
Vulnerability to Russian gray zone tactics varies significantly across Europe.
Russia's "near abroad"-defined as the countries around its border-is the most vulnerable region, followed by the Balkans.
This is largely because of those countries' weak governmental institutions and historic, cultural, and linguistic ties to Russia.
By contrast, the Baltic states are less susceptible to gray zone tactics because of their relatively good governance.
Finally, Western and Central Europe are least vulnerable to Russian gray zone actions. •
Civil organizations, rather than militaries, might be best positioned to counter Russian gray zone tactics.
The vast majority of Russian gray zone tactics are not geared toward territorial gains, but instead are routine actions that seek to enhance Russia's influence through nonmilitary means.
In short, this is primarily a social, political, and economic fight, not a military one, that is better waged by civilian agencies and nongovernmental organizations whose core competencies lay in these domains.
The military plays an important but limited role in countering Russian gray zone activities by improving cyber defenses, enhancing intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities, and building partner special forces capacity. •
Our research suggests that the West is winning this competition but does not recognize it.
Some seem to believe that, because the West cannot stop Russia from using everyday gray zone activities, it is therefore somehow losing, but this neglects the larger strategic situation.
Russia's gray zone tactics will persist and should be countered by hardening Western societies against propaganda and attempts to undermine democracy.
However, overreaction only serves Moscow's purposes.
Strong civil societies and robust democratic institutions, rather than panic at "losing" or attempts to fight Russia blow-by-blow, are the West's best defenses against Russia's gray zone tactics.
Russia's gray zone tactics signify its weakness, and the West's stronger political, cultural, and social systems will prevail over them if given the chance.