# ID: ff096d9d7b914888ba244d0931decb42
# Title: Competing in the Gray Zone: Russian Tactics and Western Responses
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The Gray Zone Is More Usefully Conceptualized as a Type of Tactic 19 f Max Bergmann and Carolyn Kenney, War By Other Means, Washington, D.C.: Center for American Progress, June 6, 2017; Vera Zakem, Paul Saunders, Umida Hashimova, and P. Kathleen Hammerberg, Mapping Russian Media Network: Media's Role in Russian Foreign Policy and Decision-Making, Arlington, Va.: CNA, January 2018, p. 38; Todd C. Helmus, Elizabeth Bodine-Baron, Andrew Radin, Madeline Magnuson, Joshua Mendelsohn, William Marcellino, Andriy Bega, and Zev Winkleman, Russian Social Media Influence: Understanding Russian Propaganda in Eastern Europe, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2018, RR-2237-OSD, p. 12; Asymmetric Operations Working Group, Ambiguous Threats and External Influences in the Baltic States, Phase 2: Assessing the Threat, Ft.
Meade, Md.: U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, November 2015, p. 29; Andris Spruds, Anda Rozukaine, Klavs Sedlenieks, Martins Daugulis, Diana Potjomkina, Beatrix Tolgyesi, and Ilvija Brug, Internet Trolling as a Tool of Hybrid Warfare: The Case of Latvia, Riga, Latvia: NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, July 2015, pp.
26-27.
g Martin Kragh and Sebastian Asberg, "Russia's Strategy for Influence Through Public Diplomacy and Active Measures: The Swedish Case," Journal of Strategic Studies, Vol.
40, Issue 6, 2017, p. 5.
h Robert Szwed, Framing of the Ukraine-Russia Conflict in Online and Social Media, Riga, Latvia: NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, January 2018, p. 66.
i Zakem et al.,
2018, p. 38; Dave Lee, "The Tactics of a Russian Troll Farm," BBC News, February 16, 2018.
j Audrey Belford, Saska Cvetkovska, Biljana Sekulovska, and Stevan Dojçinovic, "Leaked Documents Show Russian, Serbian Attempts to Meddle in Macedonia," OCCRP, Spooks and Spin in the Balkans, blog post, June 4, 2017.
k Kim Willsher and Jon Henley, "Emmanuel Macron's Campaign Hacked on Eve of French Election," The Guardian, May 6, 2017.
l Joshua Davis, "Hackers Take Down the Most Wired Country in Europe," Wired, August 21, 2007.
m Rami Kogan, "Bedep Trojan Malware Spread by the Angler Exploit Kit Gets Political," SpiderLabs Blog, April 29, 2015.
n Joshua Kucera, "U.S. Intelligence: Russia Sabotaged BTC Pipeline Ahead of 2008 Georgia War," EurasiaNet, December 10, 2015.
Russia has used cyberattacks at least twice to temporarily take down Ukraine's electricity distribution system.
See U.S. Senate, Putin's Asymmetric Assault on Democracy in Russia and Europe: Implications for U.S. National Security, minority staff report for the Committee on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Publishing Office, January 10, 2018, p. 68.
o National Cyber Security Centre, UK Government Communications Headquarters, "Russian Military 'Almost Certainly' Responsible for Destructive 2017 Cyber-Attack," February 15, 2018; Alina Polyakova and Spencer Phipps Boyer, The Future of Political Warfare: Russia, the West, and the Coming Age of Global Digital Competition, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2018, p. 14.