# ID: ff096d9d7b914888ba244d0931decb42
# Title: Competing in the Gray Zone: Russian Tactics and Western Responses
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
ecent events in Crimea and the Donbass in eastern Ukraine have upended relations between Russia and the West, specifically the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union (EU). Although Russia's actions in Ukraine were, for the most part, acts of outright aggression, Russia has been aiming to destabilize both its "near abroad"-the former Soviet states except for the Balticsand wider Europe through the use of ambiguous "gray zone" tactics.
These tactics include everything from propaganda and disinformation to election interference and the incitement of violence.
To better understand where there are vulnerabilities to Russian gray zone tactics in Europe and how to effectively counter them, the RAND Corporation ran a series of war games. These games comprised a Russian (Red) team, which was tasked with expanding its influence and undermining NATO unity, competing against a European (Green) team and a U.S. (Blue) team, which were aiming to defend their allies from Red's gray zone activities without provoking an outright war. In these games, the authors of this report observed patterns of behavior from the three teams that are broadly consistent with what has been observed in the real world. This report presents key insights from these games and from the research effort that informed them.
Types and Examples of Gray Zone Tactics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.1.
Intra-European Vulnerability to Russian Gray Zone Tactics . . . A.1.
Gray Zone Timeline Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.2.
Main Gray Zone Game Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russia's 2014 offensives in the disputed regions of Crimea and the Donbass in Ukraine present a different challenge-an undeclared form of warfare that relied on a mixture of conventional and unconventional tools-from the one that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) had prepared for during the Cold War. There have been many terms used to describe these unconventional Russian campaigns, including "gray zone conflict." This study was tasked with examining the "gray zone" in Europe, which is the expression we will use.
We define gray zone tactics as ambiguous political, economic, informational, or military actions that primarily target domestic or international public opinion and are employed to advance a revisionist nation's interests without provoking outright war.
To better understand where there are vulnerabilities to these types of tactics and how to effectively counter them, we ran a series of war games to explore the issue of Russian gray zone aggression in Europe. These games comprised a Russian (Red) team, which was tasked with expanding its influence and undermining NATO unity, competing against a European (Green) team and a U.S. (Blue) team, which were aiming to defend their allies from Red's gray zone activities without provoking an outright war. In our games, we observed patterns of behavior from the three teams that are broadly consistent with what we have observed in the real world. This report presents the following key insights from these games and from the research effort that informed them:
• "Everyday" gray zone actions must be differentiated from more aggressive and focused gray zone actions. There are two variables, the target of the action and whether it involves outright violence or the threat of violence, that are important for understanding Russian gray zone tactics, because they imply different time horizons, objectives, and stakes. Many of the unconventional tactics that Russia uses to try to gain influence are routine, diffuse, and long-term, although others have very specific, short-term objectives. Russian gray zone tactics might also be nonviolent (e.g., propaganda and disinformation) or involve outright violence or the threat of violence (e.g., a planned coup in Montenegro). • Based on the war games conducted to support this project, we observed that NATO and the European Union (EU) are unlikely to be able to compel Russia to stop using nonviolent Russian gray zone tactics, but they might be able to deter high-order aggression. There is much talk about "deterring" Russian gray zone aggression, but many of these discussions are based on a misunderstanding of the concept. Because Russia is already engaging in steady-state gray zone actions, NATO and the EU need to compel Russia to stop these activities, which is a much harder task than deterrence. Moreover, the characteristics of everyday gray zone tactics-they are largely nonmilitary, usually gradual, and difficult to decisively attribute-lower the stakes and make it difficult for the West to credibly threaten to punish Russia, even if the actions are conclusively traced back to Moscow. Outright Russian aggression with the aim of territorial expansion is an entirely different situation, and one that can be deterred by conventional means. • Vulnerability to Russian gray zone tactics varies significantly across Europe. Russia's "near abroad"-defined as the countries around its border-is the most vulnerable region, followed by the Balkans. This is largely because of those countries' weak governmental institutions and historic, cultural, and linguistic ties to Russia. By contrast, the Baltic states are less susceptible to gray zone tactics because of their relatively good governance. Finally, Western and Central Europe are least vulnerable to Russian gray zone actions. • Civil organizations, rather than militaries, might be best positioned to counter Russian gray zone tactics. The vast majority of Russian gray zone tactics are not geared toward territorial gains, but instead are routine actions that seek to enhance Russia's influence through nonmilitary means. In short, this is primarily a social, political, and economic fight, not a military one, that is better waged by civilian agencies and nongovernmental organizations whose core competencies lay in these domains. The military plays an important but limited role in countering Russian gray zone activities by improving cyber defenses, enhancing intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities, and building partner special forces capacity. • Our research suggests that the West is winning this competition but does not recognize it. Some seem to believe that, because the West cannot stop Russia from using everyday gray zone activities, it is therefore somehow losing, but this neglects the larger strategic situation. Russia's gray zone tactics will persist and should be countered by hardening Western societies against propaganda and attempts to undermine democracy. However, overreaction only serves Moscow's purposes. Strong civil societies and robust democratic institutions, rather than panic at "losing" or attempts to fight Russia blow-by-blow, are the West's best defenses against Russia's gray zone tactics. Russia's gray zone tactics signify its weakness, and the West's stronger political, cultural, and social systems will prevail over them if given the chance.
In 2014, Russia's bloodless annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and its support of a separatist uprising in eastern Ukraine shattered the notion that Europe was peaceful and secure. It became clear that Russian President Vladimir Putin would use force to maintain Russia's influence in its "near abroad"-the former Soviet states except the Balticsto undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), divide Europe, and reduce U.S. dominance of the international order. Consequently, for the first time in several decades, NATO began to seriously grapple with how to deter and defeat aggression in its backyard. However, Russia's 2014 offensives seemed to present a different challenge-a covert form of warfare that relied on a mixture of conventional and unconventional tools-from the one that NATO had prepared for during the Cold War, one which the alliance was ill-prepared to counter. The Russian government did not officially acknowledge its offensives in Ukraine, which were characterized by the use of proxies, unmarked forces, disinformation, and cyberattacks, along with the use of conventional military forces. Together, these tactics were intended to create confusion and delay a response, allowing enough time for Russia to achieve its objective, thereby forcing its opponents to escalate the situation and mount an offensive to regain the lost territory. These tactics succeeded in paralyzing the Ukrainian government and multilateral European institutions during the Crimea operation, but did not achieve a commensurate level of success in eastern Ukraine because separatist operations in the Donbass (commonly defined as the Luhansk and Donetsk regions of Ukraine) were bogged down in a bloody, inconclusive conflict with the Ukranian government. Although Russian conventional forces played decisive roles in both operations, many observers have focused on the unconventional tools that Russia used to mask the true nature of its actions and to bolster their efficacy. Russia has employed similar techniques-in particular the use of cyberattacks, propaganda, proxy forces, and disinformation-to try to create strife or to influence elections in Western democracies.
There have been many terms used to describe these unconventional Russian actions, including "gray zone conflict," "hybrid warfare," "nonlinear warfare," "ambiguous warfare," "indirect action," "asymmetric," and "political warfare."
1
which is the expression that we will use. We define gray zone tactics as ambiguous political, economic, informational, or military actions that primarily target domestic or international public opinion and are employed to advance a nation's interests while still aiming to avoid retaliation, escalation, or third-party intervention. 
3
4
To study the dynamics of Russia's gray zone activities, we employed two methodologies in an iterative way. Our aim was to develop a framework that could be used to understand the variety of different Russian gray zone tactics in Europe and also to inform U.S. strategic planning. To develop this framework, we combined extensive historical research and a review of relevant literature (including strategic documents, interviews, and analysis by other scholars) with a series of war games intended to both inform the ongoing research and further test emerging insights. 
1
The gaming and research efforts were integrated in several ways. We began by researching Russia's gray zone activities, but also began running open-ended and loosely structured games with expert players. These initial games helped us gain a better understanding of the nature of the competition and focused us on particular aspects of the problem that appeared most challenging to the United States and European partners. In other words, the early games were valuable in guiding our research, pointing us toward key questions-such as whether Russia's choice to employ certain types of gray zone tactics is dependent on location, timing, and context-and insights that warranted additional investigation, such as the dominant role of civilian organizations in combatting Russian gray zone tactics. At times, the games pointed us toward interesting observations that we then investigated further through research, including in interviews with subject-matter experts (SMEs) and government officials in Europe. Although players occasionally made important decisions during game play, it was mostly the postgame deliberations where we collectively considered the pros and cons of various strategies, and the competition more broadly, that led us to new insights that are expounded on throughout this report. In the later stages of the research effort, semistructured and structured games also served as a platform for testing various hypotheses and insights. Again, although player moves and game outcomes were interesting, postgame discussions with players and research team members were equally important. In several cases, after testing a hypothesis in a game, we conducted additional research to refine or improve our understanding of key dynamics. 
2
As mentioned previously, we developed and ran several types of games. The first gray zone games were matrix games that were largely freeform exercises where the players made arguments that were judged by umpires about what they could do and to what effect. 
3
3
4
All of our gray zone games comprised a Russian (Red) team, tasked with expanding its influence and undermining NATO unity, competing against a European (Green) team and a U.S. (Blue) team, aiming to defend their allies from Russia's gray zone activities without provoking an outright war. 
5
Creating these games was an iterative process that involved extensive research on the concept of the gray zone, Russia's unconventional tactics, counteractions to Russian measures, and their effectiveness (see Figure 
2
research to develop simple adjudication rule sets for the games; these rule sets distilled the existing empirical literature on individual gray zone tactics and countermeasures into a set of probability curves represented as a combat results table. These rules captured the central causal relationships of different phenomena but were simple enough that they allowed for relatively quick adjudication so that the game could be played in the course of a day. We do not claim that the rules or the underlying relationships are "correct;" rather, they are consistent with the literature and the understanding of these phenomena of the experts who played in our games, and offer a standard baseline for determining game outcomes.
6
Because there is no commonly accepted definition of the "gray zone," we began by surveying the existing literature and cataloging different definitions, and then used our early games to crystalize our own thinking about the concept. Although many conceive of the gray zone as a phase of conflict, our postgame conversations led us to recast it as a type of tactic. Identifying the gray zone as a tactic-rather than a type of conflict or operating environment-is a new approach, but one that has greater analytic coherence and is more useful for crafting civilian and military strategies to counter gray zone activities.
Generally, there was agreement, both among game participants and during interviews conducted as part of the broader research project, that ambiguity is the defining characteristic of gray zone activities. 1 There might be ambiguity about who is responsible for the actions, as was the case initially in Crimea and the Donbass; ambiguity about the legality or veracity of the claims made, as is true for much of Russia's propaganda; or ambiguity about Russia's true aims, as is true with the unstated purpose of Russia's promotion of its culture and heritage. 2 Employed in the absence of conventional war, gray zone tactics are a covert subset of political warfare, which was defined by George Kennan as "employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to achieve its national objectives."
3
4
5
6
8
9
10
11
It is also important to mention that gray zone or hybrid tactics are a Western concept and not used by Russian strategists to refer to their own actions. Writing that is often associated with Russia's hybrid strategy, such as those articles written by Russian chief of the General Staff General Valery Gerasimov, is actually describing a Western campaign of indirect action that is being waged against Russia using nonkinetic tools. 
12
13
14
Although the phrase gray zone is relatively new, the types of actions that it describes are not. 
15
3
What has been new and surprising to the United States and its European allies is the idea that they are facing a Russia that is actively and aggressively trying to influence their domestic politics and weaken the Western institutions that have underpinned the post-Cold War international order through the employment of these tactics. NATO's newest members, especially the former members of the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact (in addition to aspirant states) are thought to be likely targets and particularly vulnerable to Russian gray zone aggression. Despite this fact, many policymakers in Europe and especially in new member states believe that accession to NATO insulates them from violent gray zone tactics. Yet, the Red teams specifically chose new and aspirant NATO members to target in our games. 
16
17
• Support paramilitaries and separatists        
"Everyday" Gray Zone Actions Must Be Differentiated 23
The upper left-hand box represents everyday nonviolent gray zone tactics, which often have very general, high-level goals, such as enhancing Russian influence, and an imprecise notion of how specific actions will create a desired effect. 
2
3
Routine gray zone actions are low-cost and low-risk, which is why Russia widely and opportunistically employs them in the hope that some might ultimately pay off. Likewise, Russia also expects many of them to have little or no effect, especially in the short term. One example is the multifaceted Russian effort to promote Russian, Slavic, and Orthodox culture in its near abroad. On their face, these activities might appear benign, but they can create or deepen divisions within other countries, and provide Russia with intermediaries that it can use to further its interests, and a reason to be actively involved abroad. 
4
5
6
7
The behavior and decisions of the Russia teams in our games provided some new insights and support for this framework and relationships between gray zone and more conventional activities. Specifically, these teams liberally sprinkled routine gray zone activities across as many targets as possible and then opportunistically adjusted their strategies to capitalize on previous successes. Both in our analysis of actual Russian actions and in our games, the majority of steady-state gray zone activities are long-term ventures that seek to shape public opinion, create or deepen fissures in a society, develop proxies, expand Russian media presence, and enhance Russia's ability to undertake more pointed gray zone operations in the future. Most of these measures are not likely to directly further Russian objectives on their own, but they might cumulatively alter the social, political, and economic fabric of a country in ways that facilitate a subtle or gradual pro-Moscow shift.
However, nonviolent gray zone tactics can also be employed in a concentrated manner to achieve a specific near-term goal, which is captured in the upper right-hand box of Figure 
4
8
9
However, many Russian gray zone tactics have a much sharper edge than those discussed previously because they involve the threat or application of force. The lower-left hand box of Figure 
4
10
11
12
13
14
15
Additionally, Russia has undertaken much more aggressive and directed short-term gray zone actions that involved the threat of or actual use of violence, usually when it perceived its vital interests to be at risk, which is displayed in the lower right-hand box. This category includes Russia's 2008 war in Georgia and the 2014 war in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine. From the start, the former was a conventional military offensive disguised as a peacekeeping operation, which included a small number of gray zone tactics, including cyberattacks to interrupt Georgian government communications, and a media campaign to promote the Russian government's narrative in the breakaway region of South Ossetia and to the international community. 
16
17
18
19
Even the takeover of Crimea, which arguably involved the most successful deployment of gray zone tactics to date-Russia was able to annex the peninsula without going to war-depended heavily on conventional Russian forces. While local pro-Russian self-defense "volunteers" and proxies assisted by, for example, blocking the roads in Sevastopol, the operation was led by Russian special forces (spetsnaz) and unmarked Russian soldiers from the 810th Independent Naval Infantry Brigade (a marine unit). The operation was facilitated by a large snap exercise in the Western and Central Military Districts to cover for troop movements, divert attention from the events in Crimea, and deter the Ukrainian government from intervening. 
20
21
There have also been less militarized-but still coercive and violent-Russian gray zone actions in response to a particular crisis, or intended to achieve a specific objective. In October 2016, Moscow conspired with two members of Montenegro's Democratic Front (DF) party and several Serb nationals to launch a last-ditch effort to derail Montenegro's entry into NATO by trying to overthrow the govern-20 Michael Kofman, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, Oleysa Tkacheva, and Jenny Oberholtzer, Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, RR-1498-A, 2017, pp. 7-10; Galeotti, 2016, p. 285. 
21
22
23
24
There is much talk about "deterring" Russian gray zone aggression, but many of these discussions are based on a misunderstanding of the concept. Both deterrence and compellence are types of coercive threats that work by altering a target's expectations about future pain, but deterrent threats aim to persuade the target not to initiate a particular action, and compellent threats aim to convince the target to change its behavior. As one of our players observed, because Russia is already engaging in diffuse gray zone actions, NATO and the EU need to compel Russia to stop these activities, which is a much harder task than deterrence.
1
To successfully deter, one must credibly threaten painful consequences, which involves demonstrating a capability and willingness to follow through on that threat and waiting to see whether the target complies. In contrast, to successfully compel a target to reverse or halt its ongoing behavior, one must actually inflict pain and couple it with a promise to end the pain if the target relents. It is not clear that NATO and the EU would go beyond the economic sanctions that are already in place to compel Russia to end its use of diffuse gray zone tactics.
2
Because many gray zone tactics are cheap in terms of cost and risk, Russia is willing to liberally use them even when the prospect of success is low. The Red teams in our games mirrored the real Russian government's indifference to having its covert gray zone activities uncovered, in part because of the lack of credible punishment. The Green and Blue players spent considerable time and effort trying to expose Red's clandestine activities, but even when they succeeded, this had little effect on any of the teams' behavior: Red teams continued their covert meddling as if nothing had happened, and the Green and Blue teams still found it hard to come up with credible ways to counter Red's activities or punish Red for engaging in them. Consequently, the Red teams saw nearly no downside to extensively making use of routine gray zone actions in the hopes that some would have an impact.
Even if more assertive and violent efforts-such as destabilizing a country or attempting to forcibly change the government through a coup-failed or were uncovered, there were few negative consequences for the Red teams in our games. This tracks not just with recent experience but also broader Cold War history. The United States was never able to halt Soviet active measures, which were the normal state of affairs during the Cold War: The Soviet Union conducted more than 10,000 individual disinformation operations during this time. 
3
Outright Russian aggression-including gray zone tactics with the aim of territorial expansion-is an entirely different situation, and one that can be deterred. Because NATO did not have a security commitment or forces in place to defend Ukraine or Georgia, any attempts to deter Russia would likely have lacked credibility. In the future the alliance could, however, make it clear that it plans to stop aggressionwhether conventional or masked by gray zone tactics-against any of its members. Doing so requires NATO to demonstrate the will and capability to act quickly to stop Russia from achieving its objectives, as deterrence by denial would in any situation. 
4
4
Russia employs gray zone tactics across Europe, but its interests vary, and its ability to successfully achieve its objectives through these means largely depends on the vulnerability of the targeted country. 1 This insight emerged from both our games and our analysis of past historical cases. In one of our early games, the Red team drew a map of Europe and defined different regions in which Russia had varied levels of interest and, in the Red team's perception, a different ability to influence because of the strengths and weaknesses of the countries in each area. Gray zone tactics often work best when they exacerbate preexisting tensions. Vulnerabilities fall into two different but not mutually exclusive categories: state fragility and polarization, and characteristics that provide Russia with leverage over the government and society. 
2
1 Treverton et al., 2018, p. 63. 2
The politics in even relatively strong states might become polarized over divisive issues (e.g., immigration), opening avenues for Russian subversive actions. Countries can have cultural, economic, or historic ties to Russia that make it particularly susceptible to Russian gray zone influences. Proximity and, in particular, a shared border with Russia also ease Russian access to a country and concomitantly increase Russia's ability to undertake violent gray zone tactics. Economic dependence, particularly on Russian energy, is also an avenue that Moscow has been willing to exploit.
Although there are significant intraregional differences, one can identify four broad European regions-Russia's near abroad, the Baltics, the Balkans, and Western and Central Europe-where Russia's interests differ. But across these regions, there are roughly similar degrees of vulnerability to gray zone actions. This is depicted in Figure 
6
The countries that were identified of greatest importance were in Russia's near abroad: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine. 
3
Near-abroad nations bordering Russia have relatively weak militaries and poor governance, leaving them with few defenses against a Russian conventional offensive or clandestine infiltration, including land grabs by little green men. All also contain large Russian-speaking minorities that have historical, cultural, and economic links to Russia; these populations are consumers of Russian-controlled media and are potentially sympathetic audiences for gray zone information tactics.
By contrast, the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are also former members of the Soviet Union, are adjacent to Russia, and Estonia and Latvia have sizable Russian-speaking minorities. However, they appear to be less susceptible to gray zone tactics than some other regions.
5
6
7
8
9
Moreover, unlike Ukraine or Georgia, Russia does not seem to consider the Baltic states to be a critical part of its sphere of influence; instead, it aims to use the Baltics as a lever to destabilize and discredit NATO. 
11
12
13
As a whole, the Balkans suffer from weak government institutions, resulting in autocratic leaders who can run roughshod over feeble civil society, a subservient media, pervasive corruption, and extensive transnational criminal organizations. 
14
15
16
Opinions about Russia vary significantly in different Balkan nations; in some, such as the Slavic language-speaking nations of Bulgaria and Serbia, a sizable part of the population views Russia positively. 
17
In terms of Russia's interests, the Balkans are a lower priority than the near abroad, but remain an area where Moscow desires to at least maintain-if not expand-its sway and curb Western influence. 
18
19
Finally, Western and Central European states are the least vulnerable to Russian gray zone tactics and are outside Russia's desired sphere of influence. These states are characterized by strong government institutions, relatively low corruption, general prosperity, and strong and independent media. Nevertheless, Moscow undertakes everyday gray zone actions throughout this region, because although they have the worst odds of succeeding, they also offer the highest potential payoff should they weaken a long-standing NATO or EU member's commitment to European unity. By dividing these organizations, Russia could also undermine the economic sanctions put in place against it after its invasion of Ukraine. Moreover, there are fissures in many Western and Central European states that Russia could potentially exploitmost notably, the immigration crisis, widespread dissatisfaction with the EU, and concerns about terrorism. Moscow has also curried favor with several populist and right-wing parties that promote nationalist, anti-integration agendas, such as Le Pen's National Rally in France. 
20
NATO and its member states' armed forces have focused considerable attention on countering Russian gray zone actions. Clearly, there is an important role for the military in deterring high-order aggression, whether it is attempted through purely gray zone tactics or through conventional means-which almost surely will be coupled with gray zone activities-but the vast majority of Russian gray zone activities are not geared toward territorial gains, but instead are everyday operations seeking to enhance Russia's influence through nonmilitary means. In short, our research suggests that the fight against gray zone activities is primarily a social, political, and economic fight-not a military one. Our games illuminated this observation. Many of the Blue and Green teams in our games argued that this fight is better waged by civilian agencies and NGOs, whose core competencies lie in these domains. These players observed that the most effective countermeasures available to the Blue and Green teams were not military actions, but rather actions taken by the U.S. Department of State, ministries of foreign affairs or economy, or the United States Agency for International Development to strengthen governments and liberal institutions. These players viewed the military's role in countering Russian gray zone tactics as a supporting one, buttressing and reinforcing civilian activities, and something that needed to be included in a whole-ofgovernment approach.
Moreover, the West should not simply react to Russian gray zone actions or try directly to counter them. Rather, the United States and Europe need to develop long-term strategies to address the underlying weaknesses in states that Russia's gray zone tactics try to exploit and build more resilient democratic societies that will be able to fend off these actions on their own.
1
The military plays an important but limited role in countering Russian gray zone activities by improving cyber defenses, enhancing intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities, and building partner special forces capacity so that allies can independently and effectively respond to any Russian covert infiltrations. Additionally, to improve responsiveness, the United States should encourage collaboration between law enforcement and the military, so that intelligence can be shared in a timely fashion and to ensure that a country has clearly delineated the roles and responsibilities of different government organizations in the event that Russia employs violent gray zone tactics. 
2
Although many question whether Russia would ever overtly attack the Baltics or any NATO member, few disagree with the contention that Russia takes gray zone actions against nations in Europe and the United States on a daily basis.
1
Generally, players agreed that it is very difficult to decisively prove what effect everyday gray zone tactics have had in a myriad of countries. At this time, the only conclusion we can reach is that Russia has been actively interfering in electoral contests; there is no conclusive evidence, however, that those efforts affected the outcomes. 
3
By stepping back and taking a wider look at the situation, it appears that the West might not be losing. Russian gray zone tactics are now the normal state of affairs. 
4
5
6
Just because Moscow has not gained a significant advantage with its gray zone activities to date does not mean that the West should ignore these Russian actions. The United States and its European allies need to take steps to strengthen their defenses against gray zone tactics and to improve their ability to identify when Russia is shifting from everyday gray zone tactics to a more targeted campaign. Even the strongest states need to combat "truth decay"-which Russian gray zone tactics contribute to-by expanding awareness about disinformation and teaching how to distinguish facts from fiction. 
7
8
9
Russia's gray zone tactics will persist and should be countered by hardening Western societies against Russian propaganda and its disinformation and attempts to undermine democracy. However, overreaction only serves Moscow's purposes. Strong civil societies and robust democratic institutions, not panic at "losing" or attempts to fight Russia blow-by-blow, are the West's best defenses against Russia's gray zone tactics. Russia's gray zone tactics signify its weakness, and the West's stronger political, cultural, and social systems will prevail over them if given the chance.
problem because unconstrained geography impeded the players' efforts to develop a strategy and resulted in a deluge of unconnected actions that inundated the adjudicators and interfered with learning.
Ultimately, we developed a three-sided card-driven board game focused on Russian, American, and European gray zone actions in the Western Balkans. At first blush, our gray zone game looks similar to commercial games, such as Twilight Struggle. 
1
Cards provide a starting menu of actions that the Russia, Europe, and U.S. teams could play overtly or covertly (i.e., playing the card facedown) on the game timeline board. In spite of this structure, the gray zone game was also constructed to maximize its flexibility so that the players could amend the provided cards, create new cards, and develop their own narrative by expanding on the cards and overtly messaging to partners and adversaries alike. Adjudication of these actions used a simple model that reflected our best understanding of how and why gray zone tactics succeed or fail. To inform the development of this model, we surveyed the empirical record on Russian gray zone tactics and the existing literature on the individual actions that are considered to be a part of gray zone activities (e.g., information warfare, covert action). Based on this literature and SME elicitation, we created combat results tables and probabilistically assigned outcomes to different gray zone tactics. The purpose of the structured adjudication, however, was not to predict what could or will happen in the real world. Rather, it is to focus the discussion and to allow for the systematic exploration of Red gray zone actions and Blue and Green countermeasures. Moreover, with the exception of covert actions, adjudication was done transparently, so the players could understand the outcomes and argue with the control team if the adjudication seemed off. If the white cell, or game adjudicators, were persuaded by these arguments, they would amend the rules in real time. 
.1. Russian Gray Zone Tactics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Religious and cultural influence
Religious and cultural influence
• In 2016, Russian military and intelligence helped to create the multinational Balkan Cossack Army, a militaristic pan-Slavic association, and tie it with the Night Wolves gang in Montenegro, which was later implicated in an attempted coup plot r • Russian Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) ties with the Hungarian neo-Nazi group Hungarian National Front (MNA) dated back to 2012, and were revealed after an MNA leader murdered a policeman in 2016; the GRU participated in military style exercises with MNA s • Provide financial support and publicity to political parties •
a Russkiy Mir was established in 2007 by Vladimir Putin to promote Russian culture and language abroad. See map of Russia Centers, Russkiy Mir Foundation, "Russian Centers of the Russkiy Mir Foundation," webpage, undated. b Andrew Higgins, "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines with Firepower," New York Times, September 13, 2016a. c Francisco de Borja Lasheras, Vessela Tcherneva, and Fredrik Wesslau, Return to Instability: How Migration and Great Power Politics Threaten the Western Balkans, Brussels: European Council on Foreign Relations, European Council on Foreign Affairs, March 2016. d Agnia Grigas, "How Soft Power Works: Russian Passportization and Compatriot Policies Paved Way for Crimean Annexation and War in Donbas," Atlantic Council, February 22, 2016. e For other themes of Russian propaganda see Diana Kaljula and Ivo Juurvee, "Narratives About the Nordic-Baltic Countries Promoted by Russia," in Russia's Footprint in the Nordic-Baltic Information Environment, Report 2016/1027, Riga, Latvia: NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, January 2018, p. 61. An example of such an article is "Libya, Migrants & Karma: Europe's New Migration Policy Wrecks on North African Reality," RT, July 22, 2018.
The Gray Zone Is More Usefully Conceptualized as a Type of Tactic 19 f Max Bergmann and Carolyn Kenney, War By Other Means, Washington, D.C.: Center for American Progress, June 6, 2017; Vera Zakem, Paul Saunders, Umida Hashimova, and P. Kathleen Hammerberg, Mapping Russian Media Network: Media's Role in Russian Foreign Policy and Decision-Making, Arlington, Va.: CNA, January 2018, p. 38; Todd C. Helmus, Elizabeth Bodine-Baron, Andrew Radin, Madeline Magnuson, Joshua Mendelsohn, William Marcellino, Andriy Bega, and Zev Winkleman, Russian Social Media Influence: Understanding Russian Propaganda in Eastern Europe, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2018, RR-2237-OSD, p. 12; Asymmetric Operations Working Group, Ambiguous Threats and External Influences in the Baltic States, Phase 2: Assessing the Threat, Ft. Meade, Md.: U.S. Army Asymmetric Warfare Group, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, November 2015, p. 29; Andris Spruds, Anda Rozukaine, Klavs Sedlenieks, Martins Daugulis, Diana Potjomkina, Beatrix Tolgyesi, and Ilvija Brug, Internet Trolling as a Tool of Hybrid Warfare: The Case of Latvia, Riga, Latvia: NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, July 2015, pp. 26-27. g Martin Kragh and Sebastian Asberg, "Russia's Strategy for Influence Through Public Diplomacy and Active Measures: The Swedish Case," Journal of Strategic Studies, Vol. 40, Issue 6, 2017, p. 5. h Robert Szwed, Framing of the Ukraine-Russia Conflict in Online and Social Media, Riga, Latvia: NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence, January 2018, p. 66. i Zakem et al., 2018, p. 38; Dave Lee, "The Tactics of a Russian Troll Farm," BBC News, February 16, 2018. j Audrey Belford, Saska Cvetkovska, Biljana Sekulovska, and Stevan Dojçinovic, "Leaked Documents Show Russian, Serbian Attempts to Meddle in Macedonia," OCCRP, Spooks and Spin in the Balkans, blog post, June 4, 2017. k Kim Willsher and Jon Henley, "Emmanuel Macron's Campaign Hacked on Eve of French Election," The Guardian, May 6, 2017. l Joshua Davis, "Hackers Take Down the Most Wired Country in Europe," Wired, August 21, 2007. m Rami Kogan, "Bedep Trojan Malware Spread by the Angler Exploit Kit Gets Political," SpiderLabs Blog, April 29, 2015. n Joshua Kucera, "U.S. Intelligence: Russia Sabotaged BTC Pipeline Ahead of 2008 Georgia War," EurasiaNet, December 10, 2015. Russia has used cyberattacks at least twice to temporarily take down Ukraine's electricity distribution system. See U.S. Senate, Putin's Asymmetric Assault on Democracy in Russia and Europe: Implications for U.S. National Security, minority staff report for the Committee on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Publishing Office, January 10, 2018, p. 68. o National Cyber Security Centre, UK Government Communications Headquarters, "Russian Military 'Almost Certainly' Responsible for Destructive 2017 Cyber-Attack," February 15, 2018; Alina Polyakova and Spencer Phipps Boyer, The Future of Political Warfare: Russia, the West, and the Coming Age of Global Digital Competition, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2018, p. 14.
Competing in the Gray Zone: Russian Tactics and Western Responses p Alexandra Jolkina and Markian Ostaptschuk, "Activists or Kremlin Agents-Who Protects Russian-Speakers in the Baltics?" Deutsche Welle, December 9, 2015. q U.S. Senate, 2018, p. 106. r Jasna Vukicevic and Robert Coalson, "Russia's Friends Form New 'Cossak Army' in Balkans," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, October 18, 2016. s Edit Zgut, "Hungary's Pro-Kremlin Far Right Is a Regional Security Threat," EU Observer, December 23, 2016. t U.S. Senate, 2018, p. 50; Simon Shuster, "How Russian Voters Fueled the Rise of Germany's Far-Right," Time, September 25, 2017. u Kerin Hope, "Russia Meddles in Greek Town to Push Back the West," Financial Times, July 13, 2018. v "Russia's Sberbank to Get 40 Pct of Croatia's Agrokor After Debt Conversion," Reuters, June 8, 2018. w "UPDATE 3-Russia Raises Gas Prices for Ukraine by 80 Percent," Reuters, April 3, 2014. x Hans Von Der Burchard, "EU Takes Billion-Euro Battle to Russia," Politico, January 5, 2018. y Mark Baker, "Drinking Games," Foreign Policy, July 29, 2015. z Ivan Watson and Sebastian Shukla, "Russian Fighter Jets 'Buzz' US Warship in Black Sea, Photos Show," CNN, February 16, 2017. aa Thomas Goltz, "Letter from Eurasia: The Hidden Russian Hand," bb Holcomb, 2017; "In U.N. Lawsuit, Ukraine Demands Russia End Support for Separatists," Reuters, January 17, 2017. cc Elias Groll, "A Brief History of Attempted Russian Assassinations by Poison," Foreign Policy, March 9, 2018. dd "Montenegro Begins Trial of Alleged Pro-Russian Coup Plotters," Reuters, July 19, 2017. ee Roy Greenslade, "Journalists Covering the Ukraine Crisis Suffer Intimidation," The Guardian, July 23, 2014. ff David M. Herszenhorn, "Crimea Votes to Secede from Ukraine as Russian Troops Keep Watch," New York Times, March 16, 2014. gg Stephanie Joyce, "Along a Shifting Border, Georgia and Russia Maintain an Uneasy Peace," National Public Radio, March 13, 2017; Andrew Higgins, "In Russia's 'Frozen Zone,' a Creeping Border with Georgia," New York Times, October 23, 2016b.
Joseph L. Votel, "Statement of General Joseph L. Votel, U.S. Army Commander, United States Special Operations Command Before the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities," March 18
, 2015, p. 7; Van Jackson, "Tactics of Strategic Competition: Gray Zones, Redlines, and Conflicts Before War," Naval War College Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, Summer 2017; Mary E. Connell and Ryan Evans, Russia's
Gregory F. Treverton, Andrew Thvedt, Alicia R. Chen, Kathy Lee, and Madeline McCue, Addressing Hybrid Threats, Stockholm: Swedish Defence University, European Center of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats, May 9, 2018, p. 10; Alexander Lanoszka, "Russian Hybrid Warfare and Extended Deterrence in Eastern Europe," International Affairs, Vol. 92, No. 1, 2016, pp. 178-179; Radin, 2017, p. 5; Christopher S. Chivvis, Understanding Russian 'Hybrid Warfare' and What Can Be Done About It: Addendum, testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives Armed Services Committee, Washington, D.C., March 22, 2017, p. 2.
  4  The interaction between the war games and research is discussed further in the methodology chapter.
We ran a matrix gray zone game three times, a semistructured gray zone game twice, and a structured gray zone game twice.6 Competing in the Gray Zone: Russian Tactics and Western Responses
John Curry and Tim Price, Matrix Games for Modern Wargaming: Developments in Professional and Educational Wargames Innovations in Wargaming, Vol. 2, Barking, UK: Lulu Press, Inc., August 2014; Warren Wiggins, War Game Adjudication: Adjudication Styles, Newport, R.I.: United States Naval War College, 2014.
  5  We follow the traditional wargaming practice of calling the U.S. team the "Blue team," U.S. allies the "Green team," and the adversary-in this instance, Russia-the "Red team."
In the structured Balkans gray zone game, game rules were printed on cards and therefore accessible to the players, who could understand what drove outcomes. The players could then argue with the adjudicators if they believed that the rules were wrong. When the adjudicator agreed that the rules did not accurately capture a dynamic in the game, they were modified in real time and the change was noted and incorporated into future iterations of the game.
David Barno and Nora Bensahel, "Fighting and  Winning in the 'Gray Zone,'" War on the Rocks, May 19,
2015;
Brands, 2016.
Overt political warfare or other white measures short of war are not a form of gray zone tactics. George Kennan, "George F. Kennan on Organizing Political Warfare [Redacted Version]," Wilson Center Digital Archive,
April 30, 1948.
4 Some, such as Mazarr and Lanoszka, define gray zone tactics as something only revisionist states-those that seek to alter the status quo-use, but in fact one could argue that covert actions, which the United States and other countries employ and have used extensively in the past, are a gray zone
tactic.5  Mazarr,
2015, p. 39.   6  Andrew Roth, "From Russia, 'Tourists' Stir the Protests," New York Times, March 3, 2014b; Andrew Higgins, Michael R. Gordon, and Andrew Kramer, "Photos Link Masked Men in East Ukraine to Russia," New York Times,
April 20, 2014
For more on the problems that this type of phased thinking creates for gray zone competition see: Paul Scharre, "American Strategy and the Six Phases of Grief," War on the Rocks, October 6, 2016.
9
.10  Michael Kofman and Matthew Rojansky, "A Closer Look at Russia's 'Hybrid War,'" Kennan Cable, No. 7, April 2015; Michael Kofman, "Russian Hybrid Warfare and Other Dark Arts," War on the Rocks,
March 11, 2016;
Jackson (2017)
See, for example, Valery Gerasimov, "Znacheniye nauki nakhoditsya v predvidenii: novyye vyzovy trebuyut pereosmysleniya form i metodov vedeniya boyevykh deystviy [The Value of Science Is in Foresight: New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations]," Voyenno-Promyshlennyy Kuryer [Military Courier], February 26, 2013; Vi Lutonvinov, "I ispol'zovanie nevoennykh razvitie mer dlia ukrepleniia voennoi bezopasnosti Rossiiskoi Federatsii [The Use of Nonmilitary Development Measures to Strengthen the Military Security of the Russian Federation]," Voennaia mysl' [Military Thought], No. 5, May 2009; S. G. Chekinov, and S. A. Bogdanov, "Asimmetrichnyye mery po obespecheniyu voyennoy bezopasnosti Rossii [Asymmetrical Actions to Ensure Russia's Military Security]," Voyennaya mysl' [Military Thought], Vol. 3, 2010
.
13
. 20.14  Herbert Romerstein, "Disinformation as a KGB Weapon in the Cold War," Journal of IntelligenceHistory, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2001; and Adamsky, 2015, p. 25.   
Montenegro, in particular, was a consistent focus for the Russia teams in our games given its recent accession to NATO.
U.S. Senate,
2018, p. 3.   
Lutsevych, 2016, p. 10.    
Lutsevych, 2016, pp. 12, 16.    
Max Seddon and Michael Stothard, "Putin Awaits Return on Le Pen Investment," Financial Times, May 4, 2017.
In 2014, Moscow announced a ban on Polish fruits and vegetable imports for "sanitary reasons," but it was believed to be in retaliation for EU sanctions against Russia. Polina Devitt, "Russia Bans Polish Fruit and Vegetable in Apparent Retaliation for Sanctions," Reuters, July 30, 2014.
Mark Galeotti, Crimintern: How the Kremlin Uses Russia's Criminal Networks in Europe, Brussels: European Council on Foreign Relations, April 2017, pp. 6-8.
Mark Galeotti, "An Unusual Friendship: Bikers and the Kremlin," Moscow Times, July 20, 2018; Kira Harris, "Russia's Fifth Column: The Influence of the Night Wolves Motorcycle Club," Studies inConflict and Terrorism, 2018.    
Whether the Night Wolves really intimidate has been questioned. Andrew Higgins, "Russia's Feared 'Night Wolves' Bike Gang Came to Bosnia. Bosnia Giggled," New York Times,March 31, 2018.   
Economist Intelligence Unit, "Russia's Role in the Western Balkans," webpage, October 18, 2017.
14 Julian Borger, "Russian-Trained Mercenaries Back Bosnia's Serb Separatists," The Guardian,January 12,  
2018.15 Alan Crosby, "Here Are the Flashpoints You Should Be Watching in the Balkans," Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, April 28, 2017; Thomas Rosner, "The Western Balkans: A Region of Secessions," Deutsche Welle, October
4, 2017.   16  Caroline V. Pallin and Fredrik Westerlund, "Russia's War in Georgia: Lessons and Consequences," Small Wars and Insurgencies, Vol. 20,
 No. 2, 2009.17  The Ukrainian insurgency was manufactured by the Kremlin, and the Ukrainian separatist organizations were fragmented, weak, and wholly dependent on Russian support to survive. Franklin Holcomb, The Kremlin's Irregular Army: Ukrainian Separatist Order of
U.S.Senate, 2018, p. 77; Emily Holland and Rebecca Friedman Lissner, "Countering Russian Influence in the Balkans," Lawfare, August 6, 2017.
Vera Zakem, Bill Rosenau, and Danielle Johnson, Shining a Light on the Western Balkans: Internal Vulnerabilities and Malign Influence from Russia, Terrorism, and Transnational Organized Crime, Arlington, Va.: CNA, May 2017, p. 17.
24 U.S.Senate, 2018, p. 101.   
Compellence requires the target to change its ongoing behavior-in which it is investedat some cost to its reputation. To compel a target, one must alter or reduce the utility of its current course of action compared with the utility of ceasing. Thomas C.Schelling, Arms  and Influence, New Haven, Conn.: Harvard University Press, 1966, pp. 69-90.   
There are already many people calling for an end to the sanctions, despite Russia's continued use of diffuse and targeted nonviolent gray zone tactics across Europe.
3 U.S.Senate, 2017, p. 2.   
The former Soviet republics in Central Asia are also usually included in the near abroad, but they were not a part these games.
Andrew Radin and
Many argue that despite the fact that the Baltics are former members of the Soviet Union, they are of lesser interest to Russia since 2003.
Damien McGuinness, "How a Cyber Attack Transformed Estonia," BBC News, April 27, 2017; Simon Hoellerbauer, "Baltic Energy Sources: Diversifying Away from Russia," Foreign Policy Research Institute,
June 14, 2017;
Asymmetric Operations Working Group, 2015, pp. 24-28.    
Asymmetric Operations Working Group, 2015, pp. 4-5.    
Sam Jones, "Estonia Ready to Deal with Russia's 'Little Green Men,'" Financial Times,
May 13, 2015.
Zakem, et al., May 2017, pp. 1-2.    
Zakem et al., 2017, p. 6; Martin Russell, At a Glance: Russia in the Western Balkans, European Parliament Members' Research Service, July 2017.
  16 Zakem et al., 2017, p. 6; Zoran Arbutina, "Balkan Countries See Rise in Hate Speech," Deutsche Welle, February 24, 2017.
The Balkan Regional Approach to Air Defense is a joint NATO and Balkan initiative, initiated in
2010, to provide air defense capabilities to the Balkans. It is intended to be integrated into the broader NATO ballistic missile defense system, which is viewed with suspicion by Russia. NATO Communications and Information Agency, Balkan Regional Approach to Air Defence (BRAAD), Brussels: North Atlantic Treaty Organization, undated. 20 David Chazan, "Russia 'Bought' Marine Le Pen's Support over Crimea," The Telegraph, April 4, 2015.
Mazarr,  
2015, pp. 118, 126.   2  We thank Dara Massicot for this point.
Michael Kofman, "Fixing NATO Deterrence in the East Or: How I Stopped Worrying and Love NATO's Crushing Defeat by Russia," War on the Rocks, May 12,
2 Daniel R. Coats, "Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community," Office of the Director of National Intelligence, February 13, 2018; European Union External Action Service, Joint Communication: Increasing Resilience and Bolstering Capabilities to Address Hybrid Threats, Brussels: European External Action Service, June 13, 2018; "Countering 'Hybrid' Security Threats a Priority, Says EU," EUbusiness, July 19, 2017; Frank Jordans, "European Spy Chiefs Warn of Hybrid Threats from Russia, IS," Associated Press, May 14, 2018; Julian E. Barnes, "'Warning Lights Are Blinking Red,' Top Intelligence Officer Says of Russian Attacks," New York Times, July 13, 2018.
U.S. Senate, 2018, p. 2; Indictment, United States of America v. Internet Research Agency, Case 1:18-cr-00032-DLF (D.D.C. Feb. 16, 2018); Indictment, United States of America v. Viktor Borisovich Netyksho, Case 1:18-cr-00215-ABJ (D.D.C. July 13, 2018).
Mazarr, 2015, p. 107, warns of a sense of "relentless confrontation" or "persistent warfare."
Mazarr, 2015, p. 121.    
Russia has several key weaknesses, most notably its economy, its demographic issues, and its authoritarian kleptocratic regime. Joss Meakins, "Why Russia Is Far Less Threatening Than It Seems," Washington Post, March 8, 2017. For a contrary perspective which argues
For more on Russia's conventional military, see Scott Boston and Dara Massicot, The Russian Way of Warfare: A Primer, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, PE-231-A, 2017.
Ananda Gupta and Jason Matthews, Twilight Struggle, GMT Games,  
The authors would like to thank 
MG William Hix
Robert Kurtts
Dara Massicot
RAND Corporation and Michael Kofman of CNA
Latvian Ministry of Defense, Latvian President's Office, NATO Stratcom Centre of Excellence, Centre for East European Policy Studies, International Centre for Defence and Security, Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Estonian National Security and Defence Coordination Unit
At RAND, we thank our colleagues 
Jenny Oberholtzer
William Mackenzie
Stephanie Pezard
David Frelinger
David Shlapak
Ben Connable
Sally Sleeper
Jennifer Kavanagh
RAND
Gray 
Zone War Games
Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff
G-3/5/7
U.S. Army
NATO
This research was conducted within 
RAND Arroyo Center's Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program. RAND Arroyo Center
RAND Corporation
United States Army
RAND operates under a "
Federal-Wide Assurance
FWA00003425
Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law
45 CFR 46
3216.02
RAND's Institutional Review Board
Human Subjects Protection Committee
U.S. Army
U.S. Government
distributed denial of service
The research documented in this report is drawn from a series of war games developed and conducted to explore a gray zone competition in Europe. These games were held between October 2016 and December 2017 and played by SMEs in Europe, Russia, and the United States. Three distinct strategic political-military games were designed to conduct this research. The first game was a loosely structured argument-based matrix game and the next two games were card-driven games that differed in structure. All three games allowed players to take actions across different domains, with an emphasis on information, economic, military, and political-social actions. The scope of these games was varied as well, with the first two games allowing for free play within Europe and the last game limited to the Western Balkans. This final game built on the previous two games and incorporated insights derived from the earlier exercises to develop a tightly scoped and structured strategic level card-driven game.
The loose structure and seminar-style nature of the matrix game proved to be ill-suited to representing the nature of a gray zone competition, but helped us to identify key issues that merited further exploration. Because the variety of possible gray zone activities seemed limitless, the players were overwhelmed by the choices. Without a gaming platform to bound and focus the discussion, the players tended to fixate on covert tactical actions instead of the strategic competition. We initially attempted to provide more structure through simply adding cards that served as a menu for Blue, Red, and Green actions, but this proved disappointing as well, because it did not provide the players with the appropriate level of strategic feedback about the outcomes of their decisions. Free play within all of Europe further compounded the