# ID: ffa36a9a3c974103986b22643156f34a
# Title: The Sources of Russian Information Warfare
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 2019.0
# Fulltext:
The 2014 annexation of Crimea and the pro-Russian insurgency in Eastern Ukraine involved the coordinated use of military and nonmilitary measures facilitated by extensive manipulation of the information environment. In the immediate aftermath of these conflicts, US and NATO security officials branded Russia's asymmetric approach as "Hybrid War," a new doctrine that emphasizes information warfare to shape the conflict environment and support other asymmetric military and non-military measures to achieve political objectives. This thesis finds that the Russian emphasis on information warfare in conflict and the specific information warfare practices employed by Moscow in 2014 are not recent military innovations. Russian information warfare traces to the role of information in Russian history and culture, deception techniques practiced by the Soviet military and security community, and lessons from modern conflicts like the 2011 US-NATO intervention in Libya. This thesis analyzes these three primary sources and discusses application during the 2014 conflicts in Ukraine and Crimea. Based on these findings, this thesis concludes with recommendations for US and Western security officials to both acknowledge and effectively confront Russian information warfare in defense of security interests in the Eastern European theater.
The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author. They do not reflect the official position of the US Government, Department of Defense, the United States Air Force, or Air University.
Lieutenant Colonel Andrew Anderson received his commission from the US Air Force Academy in 2004. As a Developmental Engineer and Program Manager, he has served in numerous assignments related to the development and operation of military air, space and cyber systems. As a flight test engineer for the Air Force Test Center, he guided developmental testing of enhancements to B-1, B-2, and B-52 aircraft, and served as the Test Director for the final flight of the X-51A program. He also twice served as an Executive Officer for the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board.
Before SAASS, Lieutenant Colonel Anderson served as a Program Element Monitor for GPS program and was assigned to the Space Programs Directorate under the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition). He deployed to Iraq in 2008 to provide electronic warfare capabilities for Army and Navy roadside bomb disposal teams during Operation Iraqi Freedom. In 2015, Anderson was selected as a White House Fellow and served as Special Assistant to the First Lady of the United States. In this role, he worked with over 50 technology sector companies to form new long-term commitments to hire or train veterans and military spouses.
Lieutenant Colonel Anderson holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Astronautical Engineering from the US Air Force Academy, a Master of Science in Aeronautics and Astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a Master of Science in Experimental Flight Test from the Air University.
Chapter 1
On March 18, 2014, the BBC observed that Russia's annexation of Crimea was "the smoothest invasion of modern times … virtually bloodless … and was over before the outside world even realized it had started." 1 Less than a month later, pro-Russian protesters occupied government buildings in the east Ukrainian cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, calling for a referendum on independence and beginning an active insurgency that continues to this day. 
2
Subsequent evidence pointed to a well-coordinated blend of military and non-military measures directed by Moscow and facilitated by skillful manipulation of the local and global information environment. This information campaign became so effective that Russia avoided international blame when one of its surface-to-air missiles, under insurgent control, shot down an airliner carrying 298 civilians over Eastern Ukraine. The missile system had been transported from Russia that day, but Moscow quickly flooded media with false information blaming Ukraine for the incident. 
3
In the aftermath of Moscow's action in Crimea and Ukraine, both politicians and high-ranking officers in NATO now consider Russia a significant regional threat. The Alliance's Warsaw Summit Communique, issued in 2016, addressed the seriousness of the danger: "Russia's aggressive actions, including provocative military activities in the periphery of NATO territory and its demonstrated willingness to attain political goals by the threat and use of force are a source of regional instability, a fundamental challenge to the alliance, have damaged Euro-Atlantic security, and threaten our long-standing goal of a Europe whole, free, and at peace." 
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
This thesis argues that the information warfare practiced by Russia in recent regional conflicts is not a recent innovation as some suggest. A study of Russian information warfare instead reveals three predominant historical influences: Russian culture, the Soviet experience, and lessons from modern conflict. Investigation of these three influences reveals the unique role of information warfare as both an instrument that facilitates Moscow's control of Russian society and an actively employed weapon in foreign conflicts.
Importantly, an objective account of reality, or truth, has little bearing in the Russian conception of information. Instead, information is an instrument, and the quality of the instrument is determined by its ability to assist the Russian state in advancing centuries-old foreign and domestic political objectives: consolidated control of the domestic population, security from the foreign threat, and ever-expanding influence. Jolanta Darczewska at the Center for Eastern Studies writes that most Russian authors understand information warfare according to this instrumental view. The Russian concept of information warfare involves "influencing the consciousness of the masses as part of the rivalry between the different civilizational systems adopted by different countries in the information space by use of special means to control information resources as 'information weapons.'" 
10
11
1-1
1-1
12
This thesis finds that the information warfare and the asymmetric strategic approach employed by Russia to achieve regional political goals is not a military advancement born from strength, but an adaptation in the face of weakness. Using social media "trolls" to steer the narrative toward media reports with a Russian or anti-Western bias is a costeffective way to slow the spread of Western values and thwarting democratic movements in Russia's near-abroad. Russia faces a significant challenge in matching the modern warfare practice employed by NATO in the 2011 Libyan intervention. Though not involved with the military operation, senior Russian officials witnessed the rapid takedown of an authoritarian regime by Moscow's historical strategic adversary and took notice. Similarly, the intensification of Russia's information warfare coincided with the spread of democratic, popular revolutions in the Middle East and in former Soviet states. As a historically authoritarian state, Russia views the spread of such movements, often called "color revolutions," and the Western intervention that facilitated these revolutions as existential threats. Accordingly, it has synthesized information tools from historical, Soviet, and modern sources into an information warfare approach designed to counter both threats. This approach undermines future democratic, popular revolutions while simultaneously sowing confusion and discord within and among the US and its European allies, reducing the likelihood of Western intervention.
Information warfare also gives Russia a low-cost, seemingly lowrisk way to restore its historical place as a great power. President Vladimir Putin came to power in 2000 with a vision of restoring Russian unity and strength. In 2005, he argued that the collapse of the Soviet Union was "a major geopolitical disaster of the century" and has promulgated a goal of restored Russian power and influence in the former Soviet space. 
13
Russia off-sets these military, economic, and demographic disadvantages with an active information campaign to brand itself as a secure alternative to the United States and Europe: the "West." Sustaining this narrative for both continued domestic and foreign advantage means framing Western interests as diametrically opposed to Russia's prosperity and security-playing on fear for political gain. As this thesis argues, it also involves reviving the brand of Russian nationalism to appeal to domestic, regional, and increasingly global audiences, broadening Russia's influence and undermining that of the West. From historical, religious, and cultural sources, Russia frames its status as the truly secure, free, and conservative defender of traditional Christian values against the corrupt, imperial, and morally-debased influence of the West. Through disinformation and "active measures"coordinated disinformation and deception activities intended to influence opinion or policies in foreign countries-Moscow's information warfare also weakens the political and decision-making processes of the US and Western democracies, curbing the appeal of democratic ideals on the world stage.
In addition to enhanced security at home and resurging influence abroad, Russia uses information warfare to back short-term political objectives, like the swift annexation of Crimea and the destabilization of Ukraine. In these actions, Russia secured permanent and unfettered access to the Black Sea Fleet at Sevastopol and temporarily derailed Ukraine's deepening economic and political ties with the European Union. Information warfare presented the conflict environment in a way that increased ambiguity and hid evidence of direct Russian involvement.
Response to the conflict by the EU and NATO was therefore impeded, given the need for a consensus decision by these organizations. 
14
Chapter Two analyzes of the cultural influences that shape 
The social fabric that forms the construct of Russian reality must be traced back to origins in the desolate steppes, harsh climate, and vast, uncontrollable expanse that formed the mindset of its peasant inhabitants. Diane Chotikul describes the impact of the Russian landscape on the psychology of society: "nature and history have combined to implant and develop in the Russian character certain traits that have helped their rulers establish and maintain a dictatorship over the people" along with the reciprocal effect of a population ready to "bow to the inevitable, and a willingness to submit to authority." 
4
Regardless of anything which Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin, Khrushchev, Suslov, or anyone else has written or said, they continue to be affected or even dominated by the indisputable facts of their peasant heritage, their peasant environment, their peasant tradition. 5
For the Russian peasant, the basic political unit was the village that communally endured both harsh terrain and successive invasions or This legacy of authoritarian rule has, in general, increased from the 15th century onward, as opposed to a declining trend of authoritarianism in the West. 
8
7
8
Russian culture. American author John Steinbeck noted the following observation traveling to the Soviet Union in 1947:
It seems to us that one of the deepest divisions between the Russians and the Americans or British, is in their feeling toward their governments. The Russians are taught, trained, and encouraged to believe that their government is good, that every part of it is good, and that their job is to carry it forward, to back it up in all ways. On the other hand, the deep emotional feeling among Americans or British is that all government is somehow dangerous, that there should be as little government as possible, that any increase in the power of the government is bad, and that existing government must be watched constantly, watched and criticized to keep it sharp and on its toes.
9
The political culture that emerges from the Russian social fabric is one that emphasizes the need for a strong leader to defend against a perceived threat from the outside. Contrary to Western tradition, this preference for authority supersedes the importance of an unbiased, objective press, and the purpose of information from this political authority is not to inform, but to control. For centuries, this instrumental view of information of facilitated a Russian tradition where facts were distorted to enhance the authority of the ruler. Ronald Hingley observed the "the re-writing of history to suit official myth was a common procedure to Tsarist and post-Tsarist Russia alike." 
14
16
Charles Clover wrote of two recent Putin-era trends that carry on the media tradition of control. The first, dubbed "political technology" is a method of polling, focus groups and spin-doctoring conducted by the Kremlin to understand, manipulate, and capitalize on public opinion. 17
Opposition political parties are created by the Kremlin as facades to maintain a "managed democracy" in ways that maintain Putin's political 
13
14
15
Hingley, 93. 16 Brian McNair, Glasnost, Perestroika and the Soviet Media (Routledge, 2006)
advantage. 
18
18
19
20
21
22
Another related Russian cognitive trend related to dvoemyslie is vranyo, the Russian brand of "white lie." Distinguished from lozh or actual lies or untruths, vranyo is a slight distortion of the truth that is, importantly, highly plausible and grounded in reality. Hingley again traces the origins of vranyo to peasant survival of harsh reality:
For ages the peasantry were exposed to the arbitrary power and ruthless exactions of those who were placed over them; and as the law gave them no means of legally protecting themselves, their only means of self-defense was deceit. If ordinary Russians have for centuries lied to their authorities, those authorities have been in no position to complain, owing to the high degree of institutionalized mendacity which they themselves have practiced and which has not been calculated to set a good example to the lower orders. 
23
22 Charles Freeman Jr., Diplomat's Dictionary (DIANE Publishing, 1994)
23 Hingley,
The Russian Mind,
89.
24
Today we see a country that, in weaponizing misinformation, has created what we might now see as a post-truth age... There is a special Russian word for this, vranyo, where the listener knows the speaker is lying and the speaker knows the listener knows he is lying but keeps lying anyway. 
25
While historical and cultural fabric explains the character of Russia's approach to information operations, these elements largely define information as a tool for increasing domestic control by the reigning authority. Nevertheless, a common historical experience and cultural fabric shared by a society will also form the basis of a common ideology: a system of ideas or ideals that forms the basis of an economic or political theory and policy. A distinct and enduring feature of Russian ideology is the notion of defending national sovereignty from foreign threats. Andrei Kolesnikov describes modern-day Russian ideology as a mystifying matrix of historical experiences, traditions, religion, and authority with one important mandate: protecting the distinctness and sovereignty of the Russian civilization-state.
26
27
The most persistent information themes in culture will manifest as ideologies or values central to society and will have a unique ability to inspire. Historical examples of powerful information themes are grounded in religion, the concept of a homeland, or pride in a common bloodline. Such modern Western information themes ascribe universal values of freedom and opportunity. Perhaps no other information theme has fundamentally altered the course of modern history as nationalism: the sovereignty of a common people over a homeland. Ernest Gellner has observed that "wherever the idea of 'nationalism' has taken root, it has tended to prevail with ease over other modern ideologies." 
28
28 Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism, Second Edition, 2 edition (Cornell University Press, 2009)
29
30
with expropriated land." 31 Russia's geographical context of a sparselyinhabited frontier has contributed to a unique degree of imperial expansion that has endured for centuries. As Colin Gray noted, territorial expansion is "the Russian way":
It is estimated … that between the middle of the 16th century and the end of the 17th, Russia conquered territory the size of the modern Netherlands every year for 150 years running. Furthermore, unlike the case of most other imperial powers conquest by Russia became a permanent and non-negotiable political fact. 
32
This heartland region stretched from the "icy, flat shore of Siberia to the torrid, steep coasts of Baluchistan and Persia, and is inaccessible to navigation from the ocean." 
44
42
43
Combining historical and cultural fabric with an analysis of main themes in Russian nationalism yields several important conclusions and implications about Russia's use of information for domestic, regional, and global audiences. First, the ultimate purpose of information is to enhance the strength or security of the state. State-backed information within media and political rhetoric is generally accepted by Russian society if it supports the state's ability to secure and control the population. An unbiased account of "truth" is less important to the Russian citizen provided the content of information supports a strong authority. To maintain the appearance of truth, state authorities or state-sponsored media will deliberately distort reality with misinformation or disinformation, based on vranyo, while shrouding truth in secrecy. The siege mentality embedded in the Russian psyche and historical experience implies that the paramount objective of security informs the character of information aimed at domestic and foreign 
45 Mackinder,
150. 46
The Cominform, used to coordinate actions between Communist parties under Soviet direction, set the following policy in 1947:
The communist agitation programme is to be carried out by means of the 'peace' campaign and "peace" is to be used as the principal theme to justify whatever local communist interests demand.
In particular, all attempts to build upon any organization to resist the possible use of force by the Soviet Union must be prevented." 
47
Deception owes its success to the frailty of the human mind. In the 1960s, Herbert Simon advanced the idea of bounded or limited rationality to explain the idea that humans intend to make rational decisions, but these decisions are prone to errors in predictable ways. 
6
7
8
9
10
Several perception and cognitive biases are particularly important to understanding the Russian style of deception. The first is the concept of coherence, or the "tendency to continue perceiving an object in the same manner even though the object of our perception may change." 
11
12
13
14
Second, deception becomes difficult to sustain, as time allows for more information from other channels to provide a more objective representation of reality. Relatedly, successful deception must constantly adapt to changing context to continue deceiving the target.
As a result, the existence of a feedback mechanism that allows the deceiver to understand the target's perceptions, attitudes, and reactions is a vital element of successful deception. Feedback permits a deceiver to adapt to changing circumstances and tailor the deception to the target's prejudices.
17
20
22
23
27
28
31
In the words of Sovietologists, "top leaders were the principal players, in contrast to the west, where deception is relegated to a game of wits between intelligence specialists or military commanders, so that Khrushchev's rhetoric feeding the missile-gap fear is an early example of Soviet disinformation having a significant influence on the outcome of a 
31
32
33
34
37
38
39
The third category of Soviet deception techniques is "reflexive control." While maskirovka, active measures, and disinformation attempt to distort reality by increasing ambiguity of the situation or misleading with a false alternative, reflexive control targets the subconscious decision-making process of an adversary to control or predetermine their interpretation of the environment and subsequent 
38
39
40
42
43
44
47
45
46
48
Soviet deception practice enshrined the concept of information as a weapon for conflict, not just a tool of domestic or foreign policy.
Maintaining an information advantage is an obvious goal of any operational force and achieving information superiority is a vital component of US doctrine. The Soviet approach, however, institutionalized information operations at all levels of conflict and across organizations to an extent unmatched by US and NATO forces. A portfolio of deception methods, maskirovka, disinformation, and KGB active measures, relied on manipulating the information environment in ways that knew no ethical or normative restraints. Soviet information warfare practice took the distinct features of information and its use in Russian society-strength and security over truth, pervasive vranyo, and propaganda for state control-and operationalized these methods for the ideological struggle against the West.  In late 2010, a wave of revolution spread across the Middle East.
The "Arab Spring" disrupted the regional political landscape and started a cascade of conflict that endures to this day in Syria and Iraq. On 15 February 2011, inspired by the abdication of presidents Ben Ali of Tunisia and Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, Libyan citizens took to Facebook to begin a "virtual revolt," seeking changes to the Libyan constitution and other reforms. This initial virtual action set the stage for physical protests that were confronted by Libyan authorities on 17 February and quickly turned violent. The Libyan dictator, Colonel Muammar Qaddafi, responded to the crisis by threatening to "cleanse Libya house to house" if the protests continued. 
2
3
4
3
4
5
6
Summit. This international political commitment codified the premise that sovereignty entails a responsibility to protect all populations from mass atrocity crimes and human rights violations. It also outlined a framework for international engagement to prevent such atrocities in the event the sovereign is unable or unwilling to do so. The Libyan intervention was the test of the R2P concept, and yet the language did not clearly define a position on Libyan sovereignty or regime change. 
7
8
9
10
11
7
8
9
10 Chivvis,
32. 11 Chivvis,
131.
12
Demographics indicate high unemployment and an average age of 
12
13
14
twenty-four years old. Qaddafi's infrastructure policies had favored the communities around Tripoli at the expense of Benghazi. Ultimately, these factors created a highly-connected yet discontented urban youth bulge in the eastern part of the country-simply needing a spark to ignite the flames. 
15
In addition to the early "virtual revolt" and capture of regime violence for a world audience, social media and information technology aided an insurgent "air war" that mobilized both the Libyan population and an international base of popular support. Revolution leaders used Facebook and Twitter to quickly coordinate protests. When the situation turned violent, the opposition used the same platforms to transmit the most graphic images to worldwide audiences, as well as coordinate among opposition cells with "information on medical requirements, essential telephone numbers and satellite frequencies of Al Jazeera and other international media organizations." 16 Though Qaddafi imposed a media and internet blackout on the country, activists in Benghazi devised workarounds like improvised internet satellite uplinks, smuggled SIM cards, and international dial-up numbers to keep Libyans connected to the outside world. Kilcullen wrote that modern information technology "allowed a diverse movement of small groups to act in a unified manner against the regime, making this a true case of network-enabled insurgency." 17 Importantly, information technology also connected the Libyan opposition movement with a global audience. This link to the outside world not only allowed the Libyan rebels to appeal for military 15 David Kilcullen, Out of the Mountains: The Coming Age of the Urban Guerrilla, Reprint edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 200. 
16
20
19
20 Chivvis,
Toppling Qaddafi,
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
The 2011 Libyan conflict, the first of a new social media era, occurred in a world where an objective account of events is increasingly difficult to find. Social media tends to amplify the most sensational aspects of world events and drown out reality. Nevertheless, biases, misperceptions, and other errors in cognition are endemic to human nature and virtually guarantee that no two people will perceive an event the same way. As Robert Jervis writes, "perceptions of the world and of other actors diverge from reality in patterns that we can detect and for reasons that we can understand." 
22
Jervis wrote that cognitive consistency can be understood as "the strong tendency for people to see what they expect to see and to assimilate incoming information to pre-existing images." 
23
21
22
23 Jervis,
117.
24
25
26
27
28
and ambiguous evidence was needed before American decision-makers saw a state dominated by Communists as an enemy." 29 Two important phenomena resulting from cognitive consistency are perceptions of centralization and coherence. In the first, cognitive consistency will cause a decision-maker to see the behavior of others as "more centralized, planned, and coordinated than it really is." 
30
Combining Jervis' perception theory of cognitive consistency with elements of Russian cultural analysis from Chapter Two provides an alternative analytical lens for the 2011 Libyan campaign. This lens assumes the perspective of a strategic competitor to the US and the West that was not an active participant in the conflict. In this case, Russia importantly abstained from UN Security Council Resolution 1973, which defined the mandate for the intervention. At the time, Russian UN ambassador Vitaly Churkin explained that Russia abstained from the vote "because so many questions remained unanswered." 32 Also, this lens assumes at worst open hostility and at best a degree of suspicion regarding the actions of the coalition. Chapter Two provides the historical-cultural basis for an inherent anti-Western and anti-US bias: a historical Russian siege mentality and the characteristics of Russian 
29
30
31
32
34
The fact that the protests began under the broader auspices of the Arab Spring uprisings that demanded government reforms from autocratic state leaders lends an ideological undertone to the conflict that would naturally drive Russian suspicion. From a Russian historical-cultural perspective that prizes control and authority, democratic movements are, at best, no better as a basis for government and, at worst, a threat to the healthy function and security of the state. 
35
The UN mandate proscribed a foreign occupation force, but NTC opposition units were extensively supplied with NATO equipment, technology, intelligence, advice and training, and foreign direct assistance-aid that helped turn the tide of the conflict. 36 British and French action went even further: each nation deployed special forces units that trained the rebels on the use of weapons and other equipment. 37 Allied special forces also provided imagery to rebels showing the locations of regime troops in the area, and at least once gave the insurgency telephone conversation intercepts that revealed the distress of regime commanders short on food, water, and ammunition. 
38
35
36
37
38 Chivvis,
158.
39
Though regime change was never the stated goal of the coalition, several circumstances of the campaign suggest at least an implicit US support for regime change. US envoys met with members of the Qaddafi regime on 16 July 2011 and stipulated that there was "no solution that left Qaddafi in power." They also stressed that this stipulation did not apply to anyone but Qaddafi: if he was gone, all options for a postconflict government "were on the table." 41 Given that Qaddafi embodied the regime as dictator of Libya for forty-two years, this offer could be easily construed as a demand for regime change communicated by US envoys. Anti-Western accounts of the Libyan conflict circulating in mainstream Russian media point to the circumstances of Qaddafi's death as further proof that regime change was a US-NATO goal from the beginning: Qaddafi was reportedly sodomized with a bayonet, then beaten and shot by a "NATO-supported mob," and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton reacted to news of Qaddafi's death by joking with a reporter: "We came, we saw, he died." 
42
Viewing the Libyan conflict from a hostile bias, a strategic competitor to the United States could perceive a threat from social media-enabled revolutions leading to international intervention on humanitarian grounds. Theories of military competition help explain subsequent actions a competitor may take to defend against an external threat. Barry Buzan postulates three models that explain why states make quantitative and qualitative changes to their defense posture or strategic doctrine, each corresponding to different levels of analysis.    
The 2011 Libyan Intervention was a highly ambiguous conflict that drove the international community to quickly improvise a way to avert military forces were involved but merely formalized what had already been without conflict. While later evidence revealed that the Donbass insurgency was supported by conventional military assistance from Russia, Moscow seemingly achieved a degree of influence normally associated with more significant military effort. 
2
One recent example of Russia's use of soft power for political gain is the policy of "passportization" or inducing holders of former Soviet passports to apply for Russian passports. Similarly, Sergey Karaganov, a former advisor to Putin, promulgates Russia's mission of expanded regional influence, invoking Moscow's obligation to protect Russian culture and safeguard ethnic Russians, of whom more than 25 million are living in the 14 former Soviet republics (excluding Russia). 
8
15
16
18
Samadashvili,
22. 19 Samadashvili,
31.
31
32
One key to success in confronting and countering Russian information war will be to recognize its nature and its employment in the current context. Stathis Kalyvas, writing on irregular wars and counterinsurgency, cites the Vietnam War as the prime example of the US military failing to grasp the nature of the conflict. In general, he notes the difficulty of conventional forces and conventional minds understanding and adapting to confront irregular wars.
1
Russian culture forms the basis for a holistic view of information war in Russian society, and Soviet-era deception techniques were employed continually through the Cold War, even in the absence of hostilities. While the US definition of "information operations" limits the scope to measures applied specifically during military operations, Russia approaches information warfare as a continual exploitation of history, culture, language, and nationalism for political advantage, regardless of the presence or absence of military conflict. Given this definition and the evidence at large, European and American security officials must recognize that Russia is in the initial phases of information war as part of a broader hostile posture. This acknowledgment should also be included in any overall assessment of Russia's military disposition, or the phase of conflict in the Baltic and Eastern European region.
Information warfare is an asymmetric approach born from weakness, not strength
The implication of the above discussion is that Russia's information warfare must not be underestimated. The converse is also For Russia, the threat of popular protest aided by Western influence is real and existential. It has therefore invested heavily in information warfare techniques to steer information and public protest potential in ways that favor its enduring state interests: domestic stability, regional influence, and return to great power status.
Information warfare is a cost-effective approach to achieving political goals in the absence of traditional measures of state power.
Pavel Baev of the Brookings Institution writes that despite Russia's military successes in Ukraine, "the former superpower is steadily and irreversibly weakening." 
3
4
Russian information warfare must be countered in-kind, with an instrumental approach.
One of the fundamental differences between information in Russian society compared with the West is the view of using information as an instrument of state control, not a way to disseminate the truth.
Chapter Two discusses this instrumental approach to information as an outgrowth of the relationship between the authority and society in Russian history. The imperative of a secure and strong state able to defend from a multitude of foreign threats led society to accept widespread mendacity and falsehood by authorities as the necessary price for security. Vranyo, or lies wrapped in a veneer of truth, became an integral part of the Russian social fabric, and truth became whatever was needed to ensure control and security.
In the Western view, based on a belief in reality apart from cognition, the truth stands on its own and will eventually win out over falsehood. This difference in the instrumental and objective views of information explains why Russia's aggressive disinformation campaigns are rarely countered. To a Western audience, the truth will eventually prevail. Unfortunately, the Russian view better aligns with the way information interacts with the human mind. Robert Jervis wrote that "once a belief or image is established, new material will become assimilated to it, with discrepant and ambiguous information being ignored or fitting into established views." 5 Similarly, RAND studies on social media suggest that public opinion "develops and stabilizes into a dominant opinion very quickly, giving the greatest advantage to large groups that can shape opinion early on." 6 Russian information warfare leverages this phenomenon by augmenting disinformation campaigns with internet trolls to propagate disinformation and steer the prevailing narrative toward false perceptions of events. In information war, the truth cannot stand on its own. In today's fractured media environment, "truth" will typically solidify around the most prevalent or aggressivelydefended narrative or the one that aligns with biases already formed in the audience. Western media and security organizations must adopt similar a similar instrumental approach.
An instrumental approach to the information domain could include counter-strategies outlined by the Center for European Policy Analysis. Disinformation campaigns must be systematically analyzed and tracked to understand their reach and effectiveness in shaping public opinion.
Pro-Russian media outlets expend great effort to develop propaganda that targets specific audiences: domestic, regional, and global. Western media outlets must outmatch this effort to reach various audiences while maintaining a commitment to journalistic integrity. Russian social media efforts that support propaganda campaigns must be recognized and stopped or countered with similar emphasis by western sources with a commitment to the truth. Another policy approach could include the creation of new international agencies or the reconstruction of former agencies, like the US Information Agency, dedicated to strategic communications outside of conflict. 
7
9
10
11
Acting straight out of a Reflexive Control playbook, Russia signaled the adversary with information themes that predetermined a non-response.
In Ukraine, Russia used the West's values to advance its interests, while the West, always seeking to justify actions from a legalistic high ground, was unable to decisively confront this logic.
The US and NATO must understand that the antagonism with which Russia views the West is deeply-rooted. Continued promotion of a rules-based international order, human rights, and universal freedoms will not easily penetrate Russian society. Instead, it will be met with an aggressive message that portrays Russia as the defender of a distorted concept of liberty, conservative values and security in the face of the corrupt, debased, and imperialistic West. The fall of the Soviet Union was not the beginning of peace with Russia. From Russia's historical view it was instead merely new chapter in an eternal conflict of civilizations.
30
29  
29  
NATO statement, "Wales Summit Declaration," September 5, 2014.   
Robert Jonsson and Robert Seely, "Russian Full-Spectrum Conflict: An Appraisal after Ukraine," Journal of Slavic Military Studies 28 (2015): 1-22.
Jonsson and Seely, 6.   
Jolanta Darczewska, "The Anatomy of Russian Information Warfare," Point of View (Warsaw: Centre for Eastern Studies, May 2014), 12.
The Joint Staff, "Joint Publication 3-13: Information Operations" (US Department of Defense, November 20, 2014).
Vladimir Putin, "Annual  Address to the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation" (TheKremlin,  Moscow, April 25, 2005), http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/22931.
US Department of Defense, "NATO Commander Breedlove Discusses Implications of Hybrid War," U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, accessed March
21, 2018, https://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/604334/nato-commander-breedlove-discusses-implicationsof-hybrid-war/.
Marcel Van Herpen, Putin's Wars: The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism, 2 edition (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2015), 111.
Richard Pipes, Russia under the Old Regime: Second Edition, 2nd Second Edition, Revised ed. edition (New York: Penguin Books, 1997), 21.
Jeffrey W. Hahn, "Continuity and Change in Russian Political Culture," British Journal of Political Science 21, no. 4 (October 1991): 397.
Edward L Keenan, "Muscovite Political Folkways," The Russian Review 45, no. 2 (April 1986): 126.   
Hingley,[90][91][92][93][94][95] 
"Britain Says Russia Is Trying to Undermine West by 'Weaponizing...," Reuters, February 3, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-russia/britain-says-russia-is-trying-to-undermine-west-byweaponizing-misinformation-idUSKBN15I0U0.
Andrei Kolesnikov, "Russian Ideology After Crimea," Carnegie Moscow Center, accessed January 29, 2018, http://carnegie.ru/2015/09/22/russian-ideology-after-crimea-pub-61350.
Tom Parfitt, "Vladimir Putin Vows That United States 'Will Never Subjugate Russia,'" November 18, 2014, sec. World, https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/vladimir-putin/11239052/Vladimir-Putinvows-that-United-States-will-never-subjugate-Russia.html.
John Garrard and Carol Garrard, Russian Orthodoxy Resurgent: Faith and  Power in the New Russia, Reprint edition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2014), 148.
Van Herpen, Putin's Wars, 33.   
John C.Clews, Communist Propaganda Techniques (F.A. Praeger, 1964), 78.
Sun Tzu, The Illustrated Art of War, trans. Samuel B. Griffith (New York: Oxford University Press,   
2005), 161.2  Carl von Clausewitz, On War, Indexed Edition, trans. Michael Eliot Howard and Peter Paret, Reprint edition (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1989), 202.3  Donald C.Daniel and Katherine L. Herbig, eds., Strategic Military Deception (New York: Pergamon Pr,  1982), 3.   
Bouwmeester, "Lo and Behold," 128.   
John Gooch, ed., Military Deception and Strategic Surprise!, 1 edition (London; New York: Routledge,  2007), 1.
Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 2 edition (New York: Pearson, 1999), 20.
Richards J. Heuer Jr., "Cognitive Factors in Deception and Counterdeception," in Strategic Military Deception, ed. Donald C. Daniel and Katherine L. Herbig (New York, NY: Pergamon Pr, 1982), 33.
Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International  Politics, New edition with a went from a delayed paperback to simultaneous edition (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017), 3.
Heuer Jr., "Cognitive Factors in Deception and Counterdeception,
" 40.
Heuer Jr.,
42.
Daniel and Herbig, Strategic Military Deception,
32.
Daniel and Herbig,[5][6] 
Daniel and Herbig,[9][10][11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
Daniel and Herbig, 15.   
Daniel and Herbig,
13.
Daniel and Herbig, 17.   
Richards J. Heuer Jr., "Soviet Organization and Docrtine for Strategic Deception," in Soviet Strategic Deception, ed. Brian D. Dailey and Patrick J. Parker (Stanford, Calif. : Lexington, Mass: Lexington Books, 1987), 42.
Heuer Jr., "Soviet Organization and Docrtine for Strategic Deception,"28-30.   
Heuer Jr., "Soviet Organization and Docrtine for Strategic Deception," 33.
Rychlak and Pacepa, Disinformation,[35][36] 
Valery Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight (Translation by Charles K.Bartles)," Military Review, February
2016, 23.   
Christopher S. Chivvis, Toppling Qaddafi: Libya and the Limits of Liberal Intervention (New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 28.
Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight (Translation by Charles K. Bartles)," 24.
Gerasimov, 24.   
Gerasimov, 24.   
Gerasimov, 24.   
Chivvis, Toppling Qaddafi,
14.
Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight (Translation by Charles K. Bartles)," 27.
Gerasimov,
28.
"Big Debts and Dwindling Cash: Ukraine Tests Creditors' Nerves," Reuters, October 17, 2013, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-emerging-ukraine-debt/big-debts-and-dwindling-cash-ukraine-testscreditors-nerves-idUSBRE99G06F20131017.
5 "The New Great Game: Why Ukraine Matters to So Many Other Nations," Bloomberg.com, February 28, 2014, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-02-27/the-new-great-game-why-ukraine-matters-toso-many-other-
nations. 6 "Ukraine Crisis."
Gerasimov, "The Value of Science Is in the Foresight (Translation by Charles K. Bartles)," 24.
Gerasimov, 24.   
Stathis N. Kalyvas, The Logic of Violence in Civil War, 1 edition (Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press,
2006), 163.
Defense Intelligence Agency, "Russia Military Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations,"June 28, 2017, 14-15.   
Pavel K.Baev, "Russia Is Not Strong. And Putin Is Even Weaker.," Brookings (blog), June 8, 2015, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2015/06/08/russia-is-not-strong-and-putin-is-evenweaker/.
4
Robert L. Jervis, Why Intelligence Fails: Lessons from the Iranian Revolution and the Iraq War, 1 edition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), 169.
Marcellino et al., Monitoring Social Media:  Lessons for Future Department of Defense Social Media Analysis in Support of Information Operations, 14.
Edward Lucas and Peter Pomeranzev, "Winning the Information War" (Washington, D.C.: Center for European Policy Analysis, August 2016), 1-20.
William H. Honan, "Sovietologists, Years After the Collapse, Cope With a New Reality," The New York Times,
March 13, 1996
I would like to thank those who planted the seed years ago about attending SAASS. 
Bob Lyons
Dave Blair
Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying out Combat Operations." The article was initially published by Voyenno-Proyshlennyy Kurier (VPK) (Military-Industrial Courier), a private newspaper with a broader reach than the more traditional peer-reviewed military journal Voyennaya Mysl (VM) (Military Thought). 
47
48
49
50
Russian view of popular uprisings as the new defining feature of modern conflict: the recent "color revolutions" in North Africa and the Middle East demonstrate that a "perfectly thriving state can, in a matter of that special forces were used in Libya to liaise with NTC elements, but not under formal NATO capacity.
As the earlier section of this chapter illustrates, new internet social media and communication platforms played a significant role in the Libyan conflict. These tools allowed a protesting public to communicate with the outside world and globalize their grievance against an authoritarian regime, thereby spurring US and NATO intervention to protect civilians from regime violence. 55 Gen Gerasimov's account of this dynamic describes it as an evolved form of information warfare that conceals and disguises military activity under the narrative of peacekeeping activity.
Most of the article is dedicated to the question of how a future force should be trained and equipped to face this new form of military conflict. Rather than a "doctrine," it could more accurately be described The Daily Signal (blog), November 17, 2017, https://www.dailysignal.com/2017/11/17/russias-hybrid-war-then uses these cultural appeals as justification to "protect" these "Russian citizens," with harder of power, as it did in Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Crimea. 
9
10
11
12
13