# ID: ffb82ade66174ee5a783f829804dc5fa
# Title: Taiwan: America's Next War?
# Database: Google Scholar
# Year: 1998.0
# Fulltext:
The intent of this monograph is to forecast the People's Republic of China's maritime capabilities and intentions twenty years hence, in order to derive the U.S. maritime force projection requirements, with particular emphasis on the U.S. Marine Corps, necessary to prevail in a
The writing for a future Asian conflict is on the wall. The Sino-U.S. relationship is laced with complicated and explosive issues on the level of ideology, national objectives and culture. The strate-gic interests of the United States and China are so opposed that if present trends continue, one can only anticipate the future relationship to be strained beyond reason. The real issue is geopolitical, as both China and the United States have a yearning for great power. The United States is determined to be treated as the world leader, while China is not quite comfortable with that. The United States is the predominant power in the Asian Pacific, and the People's Republic of China (PRC) is an emerging power with ambitions to become predominant in the region. In addition, China is bothered by their perception that Americans regard themselves as created by God for missions on earth. 
11
12
11
13
14
15
While the Chinese people certainly prefer peaceful resolutions for their national unification, they cannot commit to the renouncement of force as a final resort. Therefore, the Chinese believe force is the guarantee that the Taiwan issue might be resolved peacefully For their government and its people, issues concerning national sovereignty are not subject to reconciliation or negotiation. 
16
The Chinese vital interests are directly linked to their sovereignty, security, and historical conflicts with the West, Russia and their Asian neighbors. The re-emerging China is determined to correct 
13
14
15
16
For China, the period began with a loss to the British in the Opium War and ended with the surrender of Japan at the end of World War II. The most demeaning event for the Chinese within this time was the 1895 defeat at the hands of Japan, alter which Taiwan was ceded to Tokyo. For the traditional Chinese state, it was degrading enough to be vanquished by "barbarians" from far off lands, but China's historical superiority to its tributary neighbors, succumbing to a local power was a much greater blow. Although Taiwan had little material value for China up to that time, since its surrender to Japan over 100 years ago, it has become a symbol that reminds them of this national tragedy. 
17
18
The Soviet Union's death removed the strategic threat on China's northern border, and in doing so also removed their strategic dependence on America. 
19
20
17
Christensen," Chinese Realpolitik," Foreign Affairs, Sept/Oct 1996, 45. 18
Jijun,
3. 19
's 1997 Strategic Assessment: Flashpoints and Force Structure, 15. 20
21
22
China's long-term vital interests are as follows: 
24
25
 Ensure that national security is not threatene4, that Japan remains demilitarized and that a US -Japan Alliance against China does not form.  Maintain internal political and economic stability so that a continuous improvement of the standard of living quality of the Chinese people is guaranteed. This is vitally essential to maintaining a legitimate leadership for China.
 Integrate China's economy into the global economic trade and financial system for its own interest as well as those of the international community. In an article appearing in the December 1995 issue of National Defense University's Strategic Form, Dr. Ronald Montaperto's argues that China's leaders believe the key to great power status is a world class economy and military. 
26
In the long run, however, China anticipates problems with the United States. They foresee problems because they believe the U.S. will challenge their quest for gaining global status. For example, China believes the current U.S. -Japan security alliance is directed against China, 27 and that the U.S. military presence in the Asia-Pacific, once a Cold War necessity, now serves as an instrument of containment. 28 However, as discussed earlier, China understands that today they are in no position for a face-off with the United States. At present, therefore, they patiently plan and prepare for the inevitable conflict they envision in the future. This philosophy is visible in the writing of General Mi Zhenyu, Vice-Commandant of the Academy of Military Science in Beijing. In 1996, he wrote, "For a relatively long time it will be absolutely necessary that we quietly nurse our sense of vengeance ... we must concede our abilities and bide our time." 
29
32
37
War epitomized this disparity. The speed and overwhelmingly technological character of the allied victory "shocked" China's military, for they quickly learned that they are years behind the market democracies concerning military power and capability. The take-away for China: A significant modernization effort must be completed before they can compete on the modern battlefield. 
38
39
40
The fundamental objectives of U.S. policy in East Asia have remained basically the same for almost 100 years, and run in contrast to those of China. Looking to the future, America will remain engaged indefinitely in Asia for three primary reasons: credibility, security and economics. In the words of Senator Sam Nunn, "No region is more important to the United States than the Asia-Pacific region,
where America has fought three costly wars in this century and where rapidly growing economies offer the United States its greatest expanding markets." 41
Among the most severe American concerns in East Asia is its military credibility. Former U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines and Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Richard Solomon, claims, "If America does not remain engaged in Asia, the area will become destabilized ... we offer a buffering presence." 42 A U.S. failure to respond to overt acts of aggression is likely to confirm the increasingly widespread Asian perception of U.S. disengagement from the region. Many Asians leaders are beginning to fear the U.S., impelled by latent isolationism, will leave their nations exposed. 
43
44
For the United States, this particularly becomes a concern with respect to their U.S. -Sino -Japanese relationship. Tensions or conflict between Beijing and Tokyo would certainly destabilize the region and strain U.S. bilateral ties with one or both countries. A military confrontation between Tai wan and the mainland would pose perhaps the most foreseeable threat to the U.S.-Japanese alliance.
For example, if the United States chose not to intervene against a Chinese attack, the U.S.-Japan alliance would likely be discredited. The United States would no longer be considered a credible security guarantor for Japan, and for the rest of East Asia for that matter. In the end, this would not only cause a quick erosion of the U.S. -Japan alliance, but would also likely prompt Japan and other Asian nations to consider other strategic and military alternatives, including a rapid build-up of their independent 
40
45
46
47
48
49
50 & 51
Concerning Asia, the United States' vital interests include the following: 52
 Preserve the balance of power in Asia favorable to the United States. This includes a peaceful, stable system of regional relations and managed resolution of conflicts. Although Washington accepts the "one China principle," the Taiwan Relations Act states that the U.S. will, "... consider any effort to determine the future of Taiwan by other than peaceful means, 
45
XXXVII, No. 4. April 1997, 383-400 48
49
50
51
52
Along with America's vital interests, the wild card within a U.S. military response to a China,Taiwan dispute will be American public opinion. Therefore, the major uncertainty --the reaction of the United States --will not be known, even by the United States until the event occurs. 
53
54
While America's interest in Asia remain as strong as ever, and as China emerges as a regional power, the U.S. military presence in Asia over the past decade has significantly receded. Even optimistic analysts anticipate this trend to continue. In other words, the United States faces growing strategic responsibilities with diminishing manpower capabilities. America's departure from the Philippines in the early 1990s was just the beginning. By 2002, most analysts agree that the Korean unification issue will be resolved. 
55
56
States to maintain its naval ports and air facilities, the forward deployed Marines on Okinawa are under increasing attack from Japanese public opinion. Some speculate that the Japanese "elite" may soon forbid forward deployed U.S. forces on Japanese soil at all. 
57
58
To summarize, as Americans "chart the path into the new millennium," four conclusions with respect to Asia can be made:  America has significant interests in Asia, and will continue to pursue these indefinitely  Chinese and American interests will eventually come in conflict since U.S. strategy toward the Western Pacific includes the preservation of a favorable balance of power and the prevention of the rise of a hegemon, the PRC ambitions are a direct long term threat to U.S. interests.  China's economic growth and military modernization will continue  America's forward deployment of forces in Asia will continue to recede. 
56 Shambaugh,
187. 57
58
59
60
63
Accordingly, establishing a robust maritime capability is key to accomplish this strategy. General Lui Huanging, formerly the Commander of the Chinese Navy during the 1980s and presently one of China's top military and political leaders, is spearheading China's maritime direction away from a coastal defense (jinhai fangyu) and towards a blue-water defense (jinyang fangyu) strategy and capability. In a Mahanian style, Lui sees the forward control of the seas as the solution to protect the nation's coastal borders. Therefore, to achieve an early tactical advantage, China's future maritime forces will be outwardly focused with the aim of opposing their enemies well forward of their continental borders. To 61 Li Jijun, 6. For further reading on the China's "Active Defense" strategy see Jun Zhan, "China Goes to Blue Waters: The Navy, Seapower Mentality and the South China Sea," The Journal of Strategic Studies, September 194, 180-208. 
62
63
64
65
67
66
67
68
China's new military strategy, however, is not for the immediate future. In the meantime, as they presently rely on outdated weapons, they await the fruits of China's economic growth to fund and manufacture advanced weaponry for their soon-to-be modem military force. That being the case, within the 2010 to 2015 time-frame, it is likely the Chinese will be capable of challenging the United States in a broadening range of situations. 69 One of the more interesting PLA focuses is its effort to improve the overall quality of its soldiers. Since 1989 the PLA has spent a significant amount on improving their living standards. This is a concerted attempt to overcome the common perception that serving in the PLA reduces one's ability to attain a better standard of living. Recruiting efforts are a concern for the PLA because of the unsatisfactory physical and educational conditions of their recruits. The more educated urban recruits who are needed to operate the increasingly technological PLA, lack the proper physical conditioning. At the same time, China's hardy rural youth, who currently compromise the majority of the PLA's recruits, lack the required educational background. 71 69 Wilhelm, 86. 70 Barbra Opall, " China Seeks Arms for World Class Military," Defense News, October 13-19 1997, 3. 
71
Bitzinger, a defense analyst for the Washington think tank, Defense Budget Project, estimates that the actual PLA budget is three to five times the official one, and therefore currently ranges somewhere between $92 to $143 billion. 
73
74
73
74
75
China's leaders, however, are aware of the importance of self-reliance in weapons modernization; thus, in the future the PLA's plan is to provide its own equipment and judiciously apply foreign technology where necessary. While selectively pursuing imports, the Chinese are dealing with multiple sources of foreign technology, effectively playing them against one another to rapidly leapfrog their antiquated systems to state-of-the-art technologies. Particular emphasis is directed to the following areas: electronics; telecommunications; missile systems; air defense systems; mobility systems; and naval and aviation systems. 
76
77
78
76 Soled,
27. 77
78
79 Blank,
13.
80
81
Before discussing China's future maritime capabilities and potential plans to invade Taiwan, it is important to first summarize the salient points and conclusions discussed thus far. On the one hand, China has expressed the desire to become the dominant power in Asia and even possibly, over time, a global power. In the eyes of the Chinese elite, a vital first step achieving these goals is to first regain their once dominant status. This includes reclaiming their lost territory which foremost means, Taiwan. The recovery of the island through diplomatic means is their short term strategy; recovery by force a long term option.
Since the late 1970's China's military has methodically and patiently been refocusing its direction, so if necessary, it can reclaim its lost territories by force. The PRC, with the financial backing of China's growing industrial base, aims to build a self-reliant world-class 
80
81
82
Complicating this strategy, however, is that over the last two decades America has reduced its forward staging capability in the Western Pacific to such a critical degree that within the next five years it will be likely limited to its bases on Japan. What becomes inherently obvious, therefore, is America' Western Pacific strategy is now dangerously flawed. The strategy is built on the premise that forward staging bases are available when in simple truth, America is severely deficient in the number of bases it can count on.
With this American vulnerability understood, the following two chapters focus on China's plan to design and build a modern military force to achieve its strategic aims as it exploits America's inability to react with sufficient force to make a difference. The final chapter provides considerations for how America's military can overcome its strategic shortcomings in order to maintain the upper hand in Asia..
Building the Maritime Capabilities to Invade Taiwan However strong a combat capability, an Army unit does not have any combat capability before entering its position.
General Sy Yu, People's Liberation Army
The Chinese believe they will only have one chance to subjugate Taiwan by force, and when they take military action, they will make sure that they can succeed in a relatively short time 83 Therefore, the Chinese will not attempt an invasion of Taiwan until they are confident they have overcome their current power projection limitations. Today, because the PLA is generally considered an antiquated force designed for only large-scale land operations, an invasion of Taiwan would be a difficult and highly risky prospect and, if attempted, would most likely fall. Even China understands that. Against Taiwan's small but more modem forces, the Chinese could not achieve air or naval superiority before the United States would intervene with its capable maritime forces. If the U.S. should intervene on the behalf of Taiwan, a
Chinese invasion force would be destroyed well before it could establish itself on the island. Thus, China requires more than the ability to cross the Taiwan Straits with a capable invasion force --it needs to achieve sufficient air and sea control in the theater of operations to define the parameters of the battlefield and to close all avenues of external support to Taiwan. 84 While a Chinese invasion of Taiwan is unlikely today, by 2015, if they choose to invade, the Chinese are confident they will be successful. By 2015, many commentators anticipate the Chinese power-projection shortfalls will be rectified, and as they modernize they are certainly developing a concept for a future invasion. Concurrently, they are designing and building a force, not only to defeat Taiwan's defenders, but also to contend with U.S. maritime forces, should they intervene. 
90
86
In contemplating an offensive against Taiwan, China's largest concern is intervention by the United States. As mentioned earlier, the success of the American-led coalition forces in the Gulf War --through the use of precision munitions, advanced command, control communications, and intelligence (C 3 I) systems, overwhelming battlespace superiority, and sea and airlift --made an indelible impression on the PLA's leadership. 
91
Finding and exploiting an adversaries weaknesses and then attacking them with their strengths is a dialectic aspect of the Chinese "you do your fighting and I'll do mine," military science and strategic thought. 
92
93
Proceedings, March 1996, 44. 92
93
94
Chinese planners point to the fact that nearly fifty percent of the weapons and munitions used in the Gulf War had to be carried along extended LOCs by foreign ships and aircraft because America lacks sufficient strategic air and sea-lift. This situation will be no different in a future Western Pacific conflict. Assuming the vast majority of U.S. forces will re-deployed from the Korean Peninsula by 2002, all that will remain forward deployed for the United States in the Western Pacific are the 70,000 servicemen stationed on Japan and at most, three carrier baffle-groups (CVBGs) accompanied by three battalion-size Marine amphibious ready groups (ARGs). Therefore, the vast majority of America's military power must be transported to theater from the continental United States --a slow process even if the United States had a large standing army. As discussed previously, with the exception of Japan, forward staging bases no longer exist; and the few remaining American staging bases on Japan fall within the range of Chinese missiles systems. Also, many analysts believe that against American forces, China will fight unconventionally --targeting America's extended lines of communication to attrite forces before they can reach the theater. This action will delay America's advance and it will also create pressure on the projecting force to guard its LOCs with naval and air assets designated for the Taiwan theater.
Chinese military analysts also realize that oil, which accounts for 50 percent of the materials consumed by American armed forces during the Gulf War, was arranged in the region rather than having to be brought via vulnerable lines of supply. The Chinese analysts ask, "If it were a long drawn out war, with many casualties and loses, can the United States promptly replenish troops, equipment, and materials and maintain the troops' fighting ability along extended and vulnerable LOCs?" 95 They point out other advantages in the Gulf War, not to be repeated again, such as the cooperation of 28 countries in the coalition and the role of 120 countries imposing a blockade against Iraq.
There is also speculation that some Chinese analysts believe that America's military might is severely over-rated. For example, they conclude that even with the great advantage of the Gulf War coalition, the U.S. had a difficult time defeating Iraq. From this, they infer that the U.S. would not do well fighting alone against China in Asia. 
96
95
96
If we have to predict, then the chance of [the U.S.] winning is only 30 percent, because the United States forces have never fought a "whole" war overseas, while the "half war" they have fought ended sometimes with victory and sometimes with defeat. The two sides fought to a draw in the Korean War; Vietnam War was lost; and the Gulf War was a victory, but fought by 28 countries. 
97
98
 A more robust, modem and capable surface fleet to include more replenishment and supply ships as well the development of aircraft carriers capable of sustained "blue water" operations.  More modem anti-submarine warfare (ASW) ship-borne air defense capabilities.  A more modem and capable submarine fleet.  A significantly larger and more capable inventory of specialized amphibious shipping.  Skill & training in conducting large scale amphibious assault operations.  AWACS and airborne early-warning aircraft (AEW).  Capable fleet air cover and air defense.  Reliable aerial refueling platforms.  All-weather capable fighter, ground attack and strategic-lift aircraft.  The ability to project and sustain an invasion force across the Straits of Taiwan.  More reliable C 2 capabilities and the ability to execute large scale joint operations.
With these invasion essential shortfalls stated, a discussion with respect to present and future capabilities of the PLA navy, air force and ground force is in order before a future conflict scenario or analysis can be presented. similar to how America pressured Israel to keep out of the Gulf War, the United States may even prefer to keep Japan out of a China/Taiwan crisis in a concerted effort keep the crisis from spreading throughout Asia.
Looking back to WW II, Chinese assessment is that although the US was in a "whole" war, it fought "only half of it" because its limited participation, which began at Pearl harbor. According to a Chinese assessment, "The relentless pressure of the Russians was the factor in the German defeat and that the defeat of Germany was a forgone conclusion before the US opened the second front in France. In the WW II European theater, the US was in a coalition with the Soviet Union and Great Britain, while in the Pacific theater the US enjoyed the combat cooperation of "China, Britain and the Soviet Union." Quoted from Pillsbury, Dangerous Chinese Misperceptions, 15. 
98
While the Chinese Navy is the smallest of China's three services, it is also the service undergoing the most rapid reorganization and change. Due to China's desire to develop a formidable maritime power projection capability, and since they anticipate that future conflicts will be maritime in character, the PLAN is now receiving the bulk of the military's modernization funds. In addition, the number of naval personnel has risen from 8 to 11 percent of the PLA's totals whereas the ground forces has been reduced from 81 to 75 percent of the total. 
101
 Moderate Assumptions. Assuming China's annual GDP grows at 4 percent for 15 years, the region could face by 2010 a Chinese navy that included two small VSTOL aircraft carriers; a small number of Aegis cruiser equivalents; a medium-size submarine destroyer, and frigate fleet; and a small number of supply ships. Again, this assumes that China wishes to invest its resources for this purpose.
Likely, by continuing with their building, upgrading, reverse engineering and foreign purchasing, by the 2010 to 2015 time-frame, the true result will fall somewhere in between. However, there are some analysts who speculate that the direction of the PLAN indicates that Chinese military planners are putting emphasis on weapons and strategies to counter American naval forces in Asia, especially aircraft carriers. 
103
102
104
With additional foreign assistance, China has also improved propulsion systems, gun loading systems, air surveillance, and fire control radar systems. The Chinese Navy has received gas turbine engines, air surveillance systems, antisubmarine torpedoes, and mine countermeasure technology from the West, Israel and Russia 105 China's interest in purchasing cheap but deadly anti-ship guided missiles is one of the largest threats to the U.S. maritime forces and, as a result, would be an ideal weapon within an anti-acess strategy. The Pentagon and U.S. State Department have recently reported that the PLA is expected to purchase Russian made SS-N-22 Sunburn anti-ship missiles. These missiles are highly accurate, travel 2.6 times the speed of sound, have a range of 90 to 120 kilometers and can be fired from surface warships. In August 1997, Russia unveiled another, more powerful, supersonic missile, the Yakhont, which it also hopes to soon sell to China. 
106
107
109
105
107
Klintworth,
6. 108
109
warfare technology to modernize their submarine force. While the bulk of this fleet is "right out of Das Boot" according to one visitor, this too is changing. Acknowledging this problem, China is in the process of eliminating many of their older submarines while they are also re-equiping their less obsolete units with Russian and French sonars, radars, communications, data processing, propulsion plant, periscopes, batteries, and weapons handling equipment. 110 More significant, in 1995 China purchased four modern Russian Kilo class conventional submarines. There are reports that the Chinese Kilo crews are being trained in Russia. There are also reported to be discussions underway with Russia for the purchase of at least ten more Kilos. Furthermore, the first Song diesel-electric submarine, a locally produced type that incorporates "many new technologies" including a more hydroynamically efficient hull, a lower noise 7-bladed propeller, and the ability to fire a submerged-launch, anti-ship cruise missile was launched in 1994. 
111
Finally, nuclear submarines will also play an important role within China's maritime focus.
The Chinese currently operate five HAN class nuclear submarines and are designing a new multipurpose, nuclear attack submarine with quieting, weapons and sensor systems improved over those employed on the HAN SSN. Construction for this new class will occur in the Bohai shipyard with the launch of the initial unit soon after the turn of the century. 
112
113
111
113
The only thing missing for a balanced naval fleet are aircraft carriers and amphibious sea-lift platforms for carrying large numbers of troops. 115 However, as mentioned earlier, these may likely be forthcoming. Analysts report that since 1989 China has been pursuing these goals, particularly with respect to the aircraft carrier. Even conservative analysts predict that within the 2005 to 2010 time frame, the Chinese Navy will possess two small "pocket" carriers capable of carrying up to thirty fixed wing planes apiece. 
116
In China, the PLAN enjoys a more politically advantageous position than the PLAAF. 
117
115
its aerospace industrial infrastructure, and enjoys greater access to resources, Chinese air power could emerge as a much more potent force 
118
119
The Su-27 Flanker is astate-of-the-art aircraft and is considered roughly equal to America's F-15 Eagle. Its primary purpose is as a tactical fighter designed to seize and maintain air superiority over a theater of interest, but can also be used in a ground attack role. It is likely that China plans to use this fourth-generation aircraft, which has provided a quantum leap in aircraft technology from its present second generation aircraft, as the backbone for tomorrow's air fleet. In addition to the Flanker, the expanding defense industrial relationship between the China and Russia's aircraft industry has also led to reports that the Chinese are pursuing other joint ventures with Russia to include: technicians to as-  Despite these recent modernization programs, the Air Force continues to have significant problems. It has a rudimentary command and control system, and they lack modem airborne reconnaissance, airborne early-warning systems, and assets to suppress enemy air defenses. Their maintenance and logistical systems are presently so inferior that fighter aircraft cannot generate more than one sortie every four to five days. They also have yet to perfect their air-to-air refueling capabilities. Flight training is still limited and by Westem standard, is considered antiquated. The bulk of its air fleet consists of obsolete aircraft, and the aviation industry is presently unable to design and produce a modern aircraft in meaningful numbers. 
126
Handbook specifically states, Flying over water and over land is completely different. When flying over ocean, there are no groundmarkers as reference points; it is difficult to estimate altitude and distance; weather changes quickly, visibility is low, and the horizon is difficult to discern; there is no navigation equipment on the ocean, and it is difficult to deal with special situations when they appear. Pilots encounter control problems over water every day, which greatly complicates training.
Therefore, the farther one flies from the coastline, the more problems there are and the more difficult it becomes. 128 The PLA Ground Force Although reduced in size, China's army is still a massive force with some eighty infantry, eleven armored divisions, and several independent regiments in twenty-four army groups. In addition, China's population base from which it builds its forces is certainly the nation's greatest military strength. In the words of Lt.Gen. Li Jijun, of the PLA, "If you treat China as the enemy, you will have 1.2 billion enemies with which to contend." 
129
Most notable, the PLA has created rapid reaction units known as "Fist Units" which are smaller, better equipped and more mobile than the basic PLA ground units. The purpose and design of these new elite units is for quick response to regional crisis. 
130
128 194 PLAAF Officers Handbook,
p. 172,
as cited n Allen,
Krummel & Pollack,
p. 206. 129
130
131
The PLA is also interested in acquiring equipment that will enhance their power projection capabilities. For example, according to Barbara Opall of Defense News, the PLA has acquired an airborne armored cavalry troop capability as well as eighty-six other types of special purpose airborne capable equipment including a Russian designed paratroop combat vehicle that features anti-tank weapons and large-caliber artillery. Furthermore, they are attempting to acquire the advanced BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicle (IFV) and the T-80 main battle tank (MBT) from Russia with license to produce them. 
132
133
134
135
136
137
132 Blank,
13. 133
Barbara Opall, "China Seeks Arms for World Class Military," Defense News, 13-19 October 1997, 3. 134
To accomplish its active defense strategy, the PLA is beginning to appreciate the necessity of closely coordinated joint military ventures. In future conflicts, it is likely their forces will employ modern joint and combined arms concepts. Colonel Xiao Jingmin and Major Bao Bin of the PLA coauthored a 1995 paper title, "21st-Century Land Operations." The paper emphasizes the importance of joint operations. They write,
The combination of land fighting forces with air and sea forces will become an integrated fighting force connected by a battle information network and formed by special units of the various army corps. Land fighting forces will be part of integrated forces in baffle. Under the circumstances, the role of the army land fighting force will obviously change and become part of the network formed by the land, sea, air and space forces .... The land fighting force will continuously receive all-round, all-depth, and all-time support from air and space fighting equipment as well as from fighting forces on the sea. The integrated operations by various army corps will be able to comprehensively use different fighting methods and striking means, thus avoiding the shortcomings of fighting by a single force coordination. 
139
140
Within their strategy, the Chinese likely assumes that if they can secure Taiwan before the United States can come to the aid of Taipei, then U.S. military intervention is unlikely. This is because both the United States and the United Nations recognize the "one China policy," and if the United States intervened after the PLA secured the island, in the eyes of many in the world, it would be viewed that the United States is intervening into China's internal affairs. 
143
144
145
Taiwan's east coast, on the other hand, with its limited landing beaches and steep and challenging terrain, is significantly less defended. Therefore, an assault penetrating the east coast of Taiwan is the PLA's most likely and most dangerous course of action. By neutralizing Taiwan's air force on Taiwan, and by using mines and part of their large diesel submarine fleet to bottle-up Taiwan's navy and commercial fleets in Kaohsiung and Keelung, the forces on Matsu, Peng Hu and Quemoy could be bypassed and contained. 146 Also, by using their multiple fast missile attack boats as a covering force, the PLA could prevent evacuation and resupply of these outpost islands. Eventually, the defenders on these outposts would surrender, especially once the PLA established a foothold on Taiwan. 
147
If too large, it would tip their hand and as a result, would neutralize the critical element of surprise and forewarn Taiwan's allies, particularly the United States. Therefore, the PLA will not aim for a massive seaborne assault. Instead, a combined airborne and amphibious assault will be the likely offensive scheme, because a balanced air and seaborne attack could be more easily masked. The staging of a limited number of amphibious forces could be overlooked as "just another PLA naval exercise," and 145
The islands of Matsu and Quemoy are reported to be defended by seven divisions (70-80,000 personnel) which have enough supplies and ammunition to hold out for a year or more. They are well dug-in with concrete-reinforced tunnels, undergrounds shelters and interconnected strongpoints that have been constantly strengthened over the last fifty years. The effort to defeat these forces would absorb too much of the PLA's energy and would take them away from their main priority -Taipei.
Water mines are a cheap and effective weapon and can be easily laid by submarines, ships, boats and aircraft. Since the waters off of Keelung and Kaohsiung are fairly shallow, they could be easily laid off the ocean's bottom. Kaohsiung in particular is vulnerable to a mine blockade because of its limited access to the open sea. In addition to Kaohsiung and Keelung harboring Taiwan's naval fleets, they also are Taiwan's critical lifelines to the rest of the world. Almost 75% of their fuel is imported through Kaohsiung. Kaohsiung is the second largest container shipping outlet in Asia; Keelung is the third largest. If these ports were effectively blockaded with mines, submarines, surface craft and missiles, Taiwan's in-frastructure would be crippled within weeks. 
147
.148
149
150 & 151
152
153
154
155
With beachheads established, they would move additional combat power to include troops and heavy equipment ashore. Their immediate objective obviously to establish lodgment, and then to quickly push inland to link-up with their airborne forces.
With key airfields and beaches secure, lodgment established and a link-up by airborne and am-152 Wen-cheg Lin in Kien-hing 
Yu,
189. 153
Yu,
[148]
[149]
Yu,
72. 155
156
157
Before discussing the concerns with respect to an American response, a few assumptions must first be put forth. While at this juncture it is impossible to forecast a force's appropriate size and organization for an intervention mission of this nature, for the sake of discussion it is reasonable to assume that for America to assist the Republic of China in countering a large-scale PLA invasion would require, at an absolute minimum, the same size American force used for the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
That is, a 500,000 man force along with the associated equipment, materials and support structure.
Yet, unlike the Gulf War, since Taiwan is an island on the edge of the Western Pacific, the nature of the mission will call for the force to be significantly more maritime in character.
Because of the mission's maritime requirements, the most serious concern for the American military planner will be the capability quickly introduce forces into the Taiwan Theater of Operations (TTO). If America can not intervene in a timely manner with enough force to prevent the PLA from securing Taiwan, then by necessity the force becomes an invasion force rather an intervention force. In other words, if America cannot react to protect the Taipei regime before they are brought down by the PLA, then the mission becomes significantly less plausible for two reasons. First with respect to world politics, a belated intervention becomes politically more risky since it will almost certainly appear as a wedging of American influence into a Chinese internal affair. Furthermore, to attempt a counterinvasion of Taiwan against a large and consolidated PLA defense becomes considerably more costly when one studies the significant difference in mission requirements and the proportionate increase in American casualties that would likely result.
When considering the time it will take to react to a Taiwan crisis, along with the extended time-distance factor from the United States to the theater of operations, American military planner must also contend with the ever-changing variable of American politics. That is, the unpredictable, untimely and decentralized nature of America's foreign policy decision-making process. Simply stated, America's military can not react until given the "green light" form the National Command Authority (NCA).
Since the American policy with respect to Taiwan is deliberately unclear, a political decision to use force to counter China will initially strip precious reaction time away from American military planners. Although President Clinton deployed two aircraft carriers battle groups to the Taiwan region during the 1996 Strait crisis, at the time no one knew for certain what the U.S. response would be.
Moreover, since it will likely depend on the circumstances, no one knows what the U.S. response will be in a future crisis. If the American President favors a strong response to a PRC invasion, then the United States might act quickly to counter the PLA. However, if the president is inclined to be cautious or reluctant to intervene, the decision to act may be delayed until the last minute. Decisive factors that may delay America's decision to intervene may include: 158  The comparative images of Taiwan and mainland China in the eyes of the American public, academics, the media, Congress, the administration, and the foreign policy-national security bureaucracy.  The anticipated cost to American lives due to intervention in the crisis.  The presence or absence of other crisises requiring U.S. military force.  The level of Taiwan's determination to resist the PRC invasion.  The presence of a convincing rational to justify U.S. intervention. Other significant factors likely to have a severe impact on America's ability to swiftly react to a Taiwan crisis may include the following:
 America will be unable to build a reliable alliance that is willing to wage a high-stakes war against China.  American forces will likely experience a severe shortage of Western Pacific intermediate staging bases (ISBs).  A PLA attack of Taiwan will likely include strikes throughout the entire depth of the island, therefore, host-nation support (HNS) from the Republic of China will be unreliable.
Adding to these factors is the time it will take America to mobilize and transit its own forces While the American ground equipment prepositioned on maritime pre-positioned ships (MPS)
off the islands of Saipan and Diego Garcia are designed to arrive quickly to a theater of operations, it is important to note that these assets require naval escort for transit, and secure airfields and deep water ports for off-loading. 
159
160
Today, as China builds its regional might many Asian leaders believe American regional force presence has become far too infrequent. As a result, there is a growing concern by America's Asian allies that they can no longer depend on American protection. In a recent Wall Street Journal article Philippine Senator Orlando S. Mercado, who also heads the Philippine Senate Defense Committee is quoted as saying, "The American always told us they would take care of our external threats. Now, they are no longer here and we have to defend ourselves." 161 If this current trend continues, it is reasonable to assume that America will not be able to rely on ISB access in the Western Pacific to the extent that they have enjoyed in the past. This is because America's regional allies, to include such countries as Japan, Singapore and the Philippines to name a few, will likely fear more the consequences from China for granting the U.S. access, than they can depend on American protection. 
159
While China's attack on Taiwan will be basically conventional in nature, its interdiction or "anti-acess" strategy waged against the United States will remain within their capabilities and thus, will be significantly less conventional. As mentioned earlier, a critical aspect of the PLA's plan is to keep foreign intervention isolated from the conflict, as they know the United States' maritime forces pose the greatest threat in this respect. Therefore, to keep the U.S. maritime forces at bay, China will use the bulk of its growing blue water fleet to isolate the Taiwan Theater of Operations (TTO). This defense against the United States, however, will not be "a simple shield," like Iraq's ill-fated 1991 Gulf War strategy, "but a shield made up of well directed blows." 
162
163
Even before hostilities commence, the PLAN will likely deploy one of its new carrier battle groups forward as screening force to the Pacific's second island chain. Key choke points leading from the South China Sea and Indian Ocean will also be restricted by mines and other naval assets. 164 U.S.
military facilities on Japan and Guam will be targeted, and American satellites that cover China, Taiwan and support the U.S. fleet will be neutralized. Approaching American carriers battle-groups will be targeted by surface and submarine launched Sunburn, Yakhont, and C801 anti-ship missile systems.
Since China believes that the destruction of even one American carrier task force would be an unacceptable risk in terms of economic and personal losses for the United States, inflicting damage to American carrier battle-groups will be a central part of their anti-acess strategy. 
165
To deal with American air power, China will again employ an unconventional approach.
Keeping their more sophisticated aircraft and surface to air missiles (SAMs) back within the TTO to protect mainland China and their invasion forces on Taiwan, they will forward deploy their longer range aircraft to attack critical "soft" targets such as American ISBs, J-STARS, AWACs and refueling platforms. This again will force the United States to protect its rear air space with fighter and attack assets previously designated for forward deployment.
Finally, while it is unlikely that China will use weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in an invasion of Taiwan, they will certainly ensure that their nuclear capabilities are sufficiently survivable 164 These chokepoints would be best patrolled by innocuous looking trawlers fitted out for this specific tasks. This disguise would make them far less vulnerable from both naval and air attack. 165 V.K. Nair, Brig. Gen. VSM (Ret.) War in the Gulf: Lessons for the Third World, Lancer Paper #3, Lancer International, (B-3, Gulmohar Park, New Deli, 1991), 224. Also see Patrick E. Tyler, "China Military Stumbles Even as its Power Grows," New York Times, 3 December 1996, A-1. 
166
We believe that we need to think about and create a true sea-based force that meets the need of the future strategic landscape … the [naval] team should seek to sustain power projection forces operationally for significant periods, if not indefinitely, even in the face of enemy long-range precision strike capability. 172
Without significant attention paid to America's maritime power projection capabilities, by 2015 China could achieve its goal of securing Taiwan. In the process, it is also certainly possible that
China will be able to deny America the ability to intervene effectively in the crisis. If this occurs, America's position and Asia, and in the rest of the world for that matter, will decline significantly.
America's most critical vulnerability in maritime crisis response is its ability to quickly project and sustain its naval power without intermediate or forward land staging base networks. While the U.S. has successfully relied on the Pacific's land base network for the past one hundred years, the changing strategic situation has quickly eradicated this option. As the Taiwan invasion scenario highlights, the more distant and critical the crisis, the more evident this becomes. For example, the distance from San Diego to Taiwan is approximately 7000 miles, and at least a ten day transit across the Pacific for today's amphibious ships. 
173
Adding to this, even if America's naval forces can establish sea-lane control from the United control of the seas made it possible for the Allies to invade Normandy and impossible for Germany to invade England. The allied ground forces, however, still had to go in and seize terrain for the war to be won. Concerning Taiwan, this is no different. If America cannot influence the action on the ground in Taiwan, then it is unlikely that it can prevent China from achieving its aim. 
174
War II. This also accounts for why the U.S. Marine Corps remains the most unique and largest amphibious force in the world.
Since World War II, the United States has maintained the Marine Corps' force projection capabilities. In the early I 980s a significant leap forward in this capability occurred when the concept of prepositioned equipment aboard ships was born. Within 10 years of its inception, this concept proved its merit in the critical early stages of both Operation Desert Shield and Operation Restore Hope.
However, with today's emerging threats this once viable concept is no longer universally valid. No longer can the decision to intervene and the ability to act offensively be long --the ability to quickly react may be the difference between success or failure. The political implications combined with the increased tempo of modem warfare, precludes the slow and steady buildup of combat power in theater, and the establishment of massive forces and their attendant logistics ashore. Furthermore, no longer can America rely on concepts that depend on access to secure ports and airfields to conduct the marriage of operational units with their equipment and supplies. 
175
174
 Capability to achieve and maintain sea control.  Capability to quickly transport and mass a large force with associated supplies and equipment into a non-permissive environment.  Capability to reinforce the initial forces with additional follow-on forces.  Forward bases from which air, land, and naval expeditionary forces can conduct operations complementary to, or independent of, host nation support.  In-theater C 2 centers capable of directing and supporting air, sea, and land systems and providing C 4 1 capabilities to a Joint Task Force (JTF).  A tactical aviation operations and support base for fixed and rotary wing aircraft.  The ability to conduct forward naval logistic support, to include forward refueling and resupply.  A logistics node capable of supporting movement of both prepositioned and deployed equipment and supplies to required locations via sealift and airlift platforms.  An in-theater organizational, intermediate, and selected depot maintenance and repair facilities capable of supporting deployed air, sea and land systems.
To meet these requirements as well as to adapt to the changing strategic landscape, the Marine Corps is spearheading the development of a forcible entry concept that does not rely on a fixed land base network. 
177
178
179
179
181
The ASB concept provides the capabilities for the rapid forward deployment of America's 1st Strategic Echelon. 
183
184
The Advance Power Projection Ships (APPS) will serve as "spokes" for the projection of sea based military power across the spectrum of operations. They also possess several distinct It is this authors belief that the ASB idea will prove to be a more viable and flexible concept than the MPS 2010 concept. Combined with the mobile offshore base (MOB), these two concepts could provide an effective maritime counter for major regional crisis such as a PLA invasion of Taiwan. A brief incorporation of these two emerging concepts in relation to a Taiwan-type crisis will be presented within the conclusion of this paper. For a more detailed description of ASB, refer to the concept paper and its three attached vignettes.
181 "Advanced Sea 
Basing … 2020
and Beyond," concept paper, November 1997
, 16. 182 "Advanced Sea Basing … 2020
and Beyond," concept paper, November 1997, 18. 183
For a Taiwan-like crisis, this concept envisions the nation's future maritime forces as "surging" directly from the Continental United States (CONUS) On APPS, to link up the already forward deployed amphibious ready groups (ARGs) and the repositioned APS at sea. The at-sea linking of these assets provides an effective and rapid 'joining" of the forward deployed and follow-on elements of the nation's 1st Strategic Echelon and forms a robust and flexible Marine Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF). Upon rendezvous, the APPS "dock" to the APS and receive their "mission load" transfer of equipment. This docking also enables full assembly and integration of the naval force and as required, 'joint force links." Once the force is integrated and assembled, amphibious operations are then executed. From its position at sea, the naval force can then maneuver forward the required assets to the littoral and ashore to achieve their purpose. If the naval force with its sea based MAGTF is not by itself sufficient in size and capability to accomplish the mission at hand; it then acts as "the critical enabler" for follow-on heavy forces of America's 2d Strategic Echelon. 
185
186
187
Tied in closely behind the ASB is the mobile offshore base (MOB) concept. As discussed above, the forces employed with the ASB provide the nation a robust rapid response capability --i.e., get there quickly with enough combat power to make a difference. However, when the force deploying off the ASB are large enough for the mission at hand, and when port, air and other support facilities are still unavailable ashore, the MOB allows the nation's 2d Strategic Echelon to quickly arrive, assemble and deploy within the theater.
Similar in many respects to the ASB concept, the MOB while much slower in its ability to deploy, once it arrives in theater provides the JTF commander with unprecedented capabilities. In short, the MOB provides 2d Echelon Forces a structure that is conceivably more flexible and capable than a traditional land staging base. Currently under design by McDermott Shipbuilding Inc., the MOB concept is based in part off of deep-water commercial platform technology. Different from the commercial platforms, however, the MOB is a self sustained and mobile unit. It is designed to transit the seas at speeds up to 15 knots (360 nautical miles per day) as five separate semi-submersible units. Once it arrives in theater, the units are then "linked" to form the complete MOB. The complete MOB is capable of supporting large scale operations without reference to on-shore infastructure. In its present design, a full MOB can also move assembled within theater at speeds of up to 5 knots. The full five unit MOB is planned to be a mile long and 500 feet wide. It has 160 acres of reconfigurable interior space in four levels and 60 acres of open deck. Due to its massive size, it can preposition up to 3,500 vehicles, 5,000 containers, and 150 aircraft. A MOB also has ten all-purpose berths for ocean going ships, and a runway 120 feet above the waterline capable of handling C-17 operations. 
188
1
the unprotected MPS forces off the islands of Diego Garcia and Saipan would be high priority first-strike targets within a PLA anti-acess scheme. Tomorrow's naval forces must develop force protection ideas to guard these national assets at anchor and at sea. This includes force protection against undersea, surface and air strikes. 
188
Academic Year 1997/98
A thorough analysis of a concept is the first step in determining its feasibility. The Taiwan scenario provides viable "threat-base" framework from which to measure the nation's current maritime power projection capabilities and shortfalls. The scenario also provides a viable framework to determine and evaluate the nation's future capabilities and requirements. As a supporting tool, the table below lists some of the possible capabilities within the sea basing concept. In addition to providing the capabilities, it is also designed to provoke further discussion and critical thought. 
189
190
This monograph has explored America's strategic future concerning the Western Pacific region. It has argued that America's future adversary within the region will be China, and that China's strategic ambitions will one day directly collide with America's regional interests. If the two nations ever go to war, the conflict will be over Taiwan. Considering what China may have regarding maritime capabilities within twenty years, a China invasion scenario was introduced. The outcome of this scenario exposed America's current maritime power projection capabilities, shortfalls and vulnerabilities. Without re-evaluating and overhauling America's maritime power projection capabilities, the United States military will fall short when it faces a modernized PLA over Taiwan. However, considering the recent sea basing concept, the ability for America to counter or to deter a PLA invasion of Taiwan has potentially been given new life. Of course, these bold sea basing ideas simply provides a School of Advanced Warfighting Academic Year 1997/98 57 starting point for re-directing the America's maritime focus. The time to start, however, is now.
24  
24  
27  
27  
Today, the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has approximately 125 major ships (56 percent of its naval fleet): 19 destroyers, 32 frigates, 19 LSTs, two underway replenishment ships and 53 submarines. In addition, it also possesses about 850 small fast attack craft, 120 mine craft and 30 medium and 400 smaller amphibious craft. While these numbers may appear formidable, with respect to real capabilities, they are not. At present, naval operations beyond China's territorial waters would be constrained by lack of ship-mounted air defense systems, poor antisubmarine warfare systems, and inadequate replenishment.
Today, the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) has approximately 125 major ships (56 percent of its naval fleet): 19 destroyers, 32 frigates, 19 LSTs, two underway replenishment ships and 53 submarines. In addition, it also possesses about 850 small fast attack craft, 120 mine craft and 30 medium and 400 smaller amphibious craft. While these numbers may appear formidable, with respect to real capabilities, they are not. At present, naval operations beyond China's territorial waters would be constrained by lack of ship-mounted air defense systems, poor antisubmarine warfare systems, and inadequate replenishment.
100  
100  
118  
118  
140 Ronald N. Montaperto & Karl W. Eikewburg, "Paper Tiger: A Skeptical Appraisal of China's Military Might," Harvard International Review, Spring 1996, 30. 141 Yu Guangning, "A
161  
161  
172 Roman Schweizer, "Marine Corps Drafting New Strategic Concept for Advanced Sea Basing: Planning for Operations After 2010," Inside the Pentagon's Inside the Navy, Washington DC, Vol. 10 No.. 46, 17 November 1997, 1 & 15. 173 George and Meredith Friedman, The Future of War: Power, Technology, and American World Dominance in the 21st Century (New York: Crown Publishers, 1996). 438-442.
 Peter, 69.   
Martin L. Lasater, A U.S. Perception of a PLA invasion of Taiwan, in Peter Kien-hingYu, 257   
General consensus of seminar panel members at CAN Conference directed seminar. Participants included: James Schlesenger, Arnold Kanter Richard Solomon, David McCurdy, Richard Clark, Adm. Stanley Authur, Gen. Robert Sennewals, James Litlley, James Laney, Frank McNeil,, 31 October 1997, Washington DC.
Zalamea, 70.   
 Peter, 83.   
Zeng Liang-ping, "Leap Month of August 1995: T Day -The Warning of War in the Taiwan Strait," Business Weekly, Taipei, August 1994, as cited in John Zeng, in Kien-hong Yu, 139-140.
China will likely target Taiwan's interior road and rail network prior to an invasion to prevent the ROC Army from shifting its ground forces rapidly to the PLA landing sites, so argues Felix Chang, "Conventional War Across the Taiwan Strait", Orbis, Fall 1996, 580.
Taipei is the capitol of Taiwan and the seat for the ROC government. It is likely that the PLA has identified this as Taiwan's strategic center of gravity.
  157  Zeng, in Kien-hingYu,[153][154] 
Carl Von Clausewitz, On War, edited by Michael Howard and Peter Paret, (Princeton University Press, NJ, 1976,) 229.
Yossef Bodansky, "China's Invasion: The Final Warnings," Defense and Foreign Affairs Strategic Policy, 29 February  1996, 14, as cited in Zalamea, 70.
China possesses the world's third largest nuclear weapons arsenal, including more than 80 intermediate range ballistic missiles (IRBMs) and more than 20 inter-continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
To name a few instances, America was caught off guard by the Japanese in 1941 with their surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, by the Chinese in 1950 with their surprise entry into the Korean War, and by Iraq in 1990 with surprise their attack on Kuwait.
  169  Martin L. Lasater, in Kien-hingYu, 243.  
And complete the construction of one of the most centralized and top-down political systems ever devised; even though in the process he sent millions of young men to their death.171   
APS and APPS would be high pa-off targets for a future adversary. As was pointed out within the Taiwan scenario,
ADDRESS(ES) 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 11
SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 5 Comment of Don Oberdorfer during a lecture presentation at Center for Naval
CNA, China
United States, and Japan: Implications for Future US Security Strategy in East Asia, Washington, DC
Honorable Arnold Kanter
Honorable Richard Solomon
Honorable David McCurdy
Honorable Richard Clark
Adm. Stanley Authur USN (Ret)
Vice Chief of Naval Operations)
General Robert Sennewald, USA (Ret) (former Commander in Chief of UN Command and Combined Forces ROK/
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
and accurate enough to deter their use by America In addition, an argument can be made that having a capable nuclear threat may, in itself, deter the United States from intervention into a Taiwan crisis in the first place. 167 Other Considerations with Respect to a Taiwan Invasion While it is not entirely likely, some analysts caution that there is a remote possibility that Beijing is masking its capabilities to invade Taiwan. In other words, they may possess the ability to invade Taiwan sooner than the West anticipates. This is consistent with China's principles of warfare and is an obvious way to exploit America's uncanny ability to be easily surprised. 
168
169
170